Historically, The Gambia’s growth performance has been mediocre, characterized by repeated weather-related shocks. The Gambia’s real per capita GDP growth over 2004–14 averaged less than ½ percent per year, among the lowest in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). As a consequence, The Gambia remains among the poorest countries in the world. Over the last 50 years, The Gambia has been hit by eleven instances of drought, with four in just the last 12 years. This has contributed significantly to The Gambia’s inability to sustain uninterrupted periods of growth. Since 1965, The Gambia has had just three short-lived episodes—a combined duration of 16 years—of growth spells, i.e., periods of real per capita growth in excess of 2 percent. The remaining years, The Gambia had low or negative per-capita growth. This includes three spells of a combined duration of 22 years in which per-capita growth was negative. The Gambia’s growth performance displays fragile state characteristics. This pattern has continued in recent years as persistent policy slippages, exacerbated by sizable exogenous shocks, have intensified macroeconomic pressures . Persistent slippages, characterized in particular by very loose fiscal policy, increased significantly macroeconomic vulnerabilities over 2013–14. In addition, while The Gambia has been Ebola free, its tourism industry was hit by a large shock associated with the regional Ebola outbreak which is estimated to have cut tourism receipts for the 2014/15 season by more than half. The country is benefitting from the presently lower global fuel prices, but the net impact of the shocks on the balance of payments is estimated to be $40 million during 2014 ‒ 15 (over 5 percent of 2015 GDP). Furthermore, the delayed summer rains in 2014 led to about a 15 percent decline of the year’s crop with serious implications for real GDP and food security. As a consequence, the already large current account and fiscal deficits expanded substantially (Figure 1, Tables 1 ‒ 7). Faced with mounting pressures, the exchange rate depreciated by about 10 percent during the first four months of 2015 while inflation has been hovering around 6½ ‒ 7¼ percent since late 2014, up from around 5½ percent in the summer of 2014. The Fund supported The Gambia with an RCF disbursement in early April 2015 and through a staff-monitored program (SMP). The persistent pattern of external shocks and policy slippages in recent years has led to the erosion of all policy buffers. The public debt stock rose from just below 70 percent of GDP at end-2010 to 100 percent by end-2014. Meanwhile, the gross official reserves’ import coverage has declined from 6 months at end-2012 to below 3 months now. Reserves’ import coverage is even The benchmark for desired per capita GDP growth is based on the cross-country analysis in Berg et al (2012) (see Annex II). Using the same methodology as in Annex II, the IMF Policy paper, The Macroeconomic and Operational Challenges of Countries in Fragile Situations, June 2011, reports that over 1960-2009, fragile states had equal numbers of up- breaks and down-breaks in growth, while non-fragile LICs had nearly twice as many up-breaks as down-breaks. Page 9 lower after accounting for a swap operation conducted in April 2015 that has temporarily boosted reserves by $20 million. Progress in implementing past Fund policy advice has been mixed (Box 1). Domestic fuel prices have been adjusted to eliminate subsidies. The authorities’ continued efforts to strengthen revenue administration helped to raise the revenue-to-GDP ratio from 16½ percent in 2012 to 18¾ percent in 2014. Despite these efforts on the revenue side, sizable extra-budgetary spending pressures and the fiscal burden arising from the financial difficulties of key public enterprises worsened the fiscal position considerably (see IMF Country Report No. 15/104)—the government’s net domestic borrowing (NDB) surged from 3½ percent of GDP in 2012 to 12¼ percent of GDP in 2014. The government’s domestic borrowing needs have been met substantially by the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG) financing. The CBG has deployed its available instruments to tighten the monetary policy stance, but its policy conduct has been severely complicated by the government’s financing requirements and the temporary impositions of over-valued exchange rates by the Office of the President—October 2012 through November 2012, June 2013 through October 2013, and May 2015 to present (see below). Box 1. The Gambia: Main Recommendations of the 2013 Article IV Consultation Recommendations Status Fiscal Policy and Public Financial Management 1. Reduce the net domestic borrowing (NDB) of the government to ½ percent of GDP by 2014 and in the medium term through spending discipline and broadening tax base. 2. Eliminate fuel subsidies. 3. Enhance the budget process and strengthen expenditure control. 1. The NDB reached 12¼ percent in 2014 due to very large fiscal slippages and persistent financial difficulties in key public enterprises. 2. Fuel subsidies were eliminated in July 2014, and some progress has been made in bringing utility tariffs closer to cost-recovery levels, but the scope to achieve cost recovery through further tariff increases is limited in the short run. 3. Expenditure control is still very weak with significant unbudgeted spending in 2014. 4. Improve debt management. 4. Efforts are underway but debt management is still weak. Under the swap arrangement, a commercial bank supplied US$20 million to the CBG in return for GMD equivalent amount in the first quarter of 2015. The Swap will be reversed in staggered payments of US$4 million each in July 2015 and January, February, March and April 2016. Page 10 Box 1. The Gambia: Main Recommendations of the 2013 Article IV Consultation (concluded) 5. Maintain a flexible exchange rate policy. 5. Flexible exchange rate policy has been compromised by Monetary and foreign exchange policy 6. Make REPO instruments operational to repeated presidential directives imposing foreign exchange rates and other restrictions, with the most recent issued on May 4 th 6. Fiscal dominance has delayed launching of REPOs and improve liquidity management and reduce reliance on the reserve requirement ratio which is a blunt instrument. prevented the CBG from reducing reliance on the required reserve for liquidity management. 7. Establish a collateral register and resolve 7. Significant progress has been achieved with the collateral Financial sector policy Credit Reference Bureau’s (CRB’s) technical glitches. 8. Maintain Intensive surveillance of the banking system. Source: IMF staff. registry which is almost ready to launch. The CRB is fully functional but commercial banks have been updating borrowers’ information only with a delay. 8. The CBG’s annual review of individual commercial banks’ performance on the basis of end-year financial soundness indicators and discussion of corrective measures where applicable is on track for 2014. There is scope to further strengthen bank supervision. The authorities’ SMP recognized the need for strong policy actions augmented by substantial donor budget support to address their difficulties. The 2015 budget aimed at lowering net domestic borrowing (NDB) to 1 percent of GDP in 2015 from 12¼ percent in 2014, with broadly equal contributions from savings measures and external budget support, including the RCF disbursement. The authorities also intended to address the financial problems of key public enterprises to limit their drain on the state budget. These steps were expected to stabilize the macroeconomic situation in 2015 and give the authorities the time needed to develop their medium-term adjustment plans. Policy implementation until mid-April 2015 was broadly in line with commitments in the authorities’ Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) for the SMP. With continued strong policy implementation the near- and medium-term economic outlook was seen to be positive. Real GDP growth was expected to rebound strongly driven by the recovery of agriculture and tourism activity while the envisaged fiscal consolidation and reforms under the MEFP were supposed to bring the public debt to a sustainable path, as illustrated in the baseline macro framework tables in the Staff Report for the RCF request (see IMF Country Report No. 15/104). The strategy set out in the SMP was also intended to lay the foundation for The Page 11 Gambia to break out of its historically mediocre growth performance. Policy buffers would be gradually rebuilt, and together with appropriate structural reforms, to create a favorable climate for private investment favoring economic diversification.