Rebuilding fiscal policy buffers. The pace of fiscal consolidation has been more gradual than previously envisaged owing to both weaker than expected growth and recent revisions in the fiscal accounts. Looking forward, and despite the more gradual pace of consolidation, the primary fiscal balance is expected to return to a surplus over the next two years. As a result, the central government debt to GDP ratio is expected to stabilize at 67 percent of GDP by FY2016/17 and begin to decline gradually thereafter (Annex I: Debt Sustainability Analysis). Fiscal vulnerabilities extend beyond the central government. SOE’s debt amounted to an additional 17.4 percent of GDP in December 2015 and the unfunded pension liabilities of the public pension system, already sizeable at $2.2 billion (about 26.2 percent of GDP), are projected to grow further in the next decades (Annex II: Pension Reform). Page 18 Following smooth VAT introduction, focus on other fiscal reforms . Further initiatives include a review of all revenue lines, and modernization of customs, property tax, vehicle fees, and immigration fee administration. The authorities recently stepped up revenue administration reform by introducing online payment of business license fees, electronic filing of customs import declaration, and merging the operations of key domestic revenue agencies as a step towards establishing a Central Revenue Agency (CRA). The government is also taking steps to introduce a National Health Insurance (NHI) scheme to be rolled out in phases, with public consultation still under way and with the cost and sources of funding yet to be determined. The authorities released a consultation paper on fiscal responsibility legislation in May 2015, which has yet to be discussed. Combination of growth-friendly reforms to help fiscal consolidation. Revenue reforms. Staff called for standing firm against pressures to weaken the VAT’s efficiency through introducing exemptions to items such as food, medical and insurance services, which could amount to an estimated ¾ percent of GDP in revenue losses. Social concerns should instead be addressed by targeted adjustments to the safety net. In addition, the authorities should comprehensively review other tax exemptions and concessions, including to the tourism sector, and consider eliminating low revenue yielding fees and duties, and further simplifying domestic taxes (such as the business license fee regime) that are not business–friendly. While VAT introduction has increased tax utilization capacity, there is substantial room to raise more revenue through non-distortionary consumption taxes to compensate for revenue losses elsewhere. Staff welcomes recent progress in improving revenue administration. Efforts should focus on moving further towards a fully–fledged CRA with well-defined institutional framework and governance structure empowered to administer most domestic taxes, thereby reducing costs, and improving efficiency and compliance. Further steps to ensure continued success in VAT implementation include more focus on program development, planning and performance monitoring based on operational data and establishing an audit program. Expenditure reforms. Fiscal consolidation has so far focused on the revenue side, while government expenditure has been drifting upwards after the GFC. Staff reiterated that rationalization of current expenditure in the context of a medium–term budget framework (see below) would help preserve the hard-won benefits of the VAT, enhance policy credibility in the low growth environment and strengthen fiscal sustainability. Such a framework should seek to contain further growth in current spending and gradually unwinding crisis related spending increases. The authorities should resist pressure to increase public wages and employment, especially in view of low labor productivity growth, while also strengthening payroll management. Furthermore, enhancing the efficiency of spending on goods and services and transfers and subsidies would generate fiscal savings. Staff urged the authorities to advance SOE reforms to reduce their drain on the budget. Finally, the authorities should begin to take Wages andsalariesGoods andservicesSubsidies andtransfersCapitalexpenditure Pre-crisis average Post-crisis average Composition of Primary Spending (In percent of GDP, 7 year average) Sources: Central Bank of the Bahamas and Fund staff estimates. Page 19 measures to address risks from the pension system, through parametric reforms and over the medium-term, through the introduction of a sustainable defined contribution system. Medium term budget framework and public financial management (PFM) reforms Weaknesses in the PFM environment, such as out-of-date accounting system and Chart of Accounts, undermine the integrity of financial reporting and spending quality. Capital budgeting is not fully integrated into the annual budget planning process. Staff emphasized that improving fiscal reporting, introducing procedural rules to support expenditure discipline and preparing a medium-term fiscal framework document, submitted to the parliament, are important immediate steps towards adopting a fiscal rule. To strengthen their commitment to fiscal responsibility, the authorities should consider further intermediate steps towards a fully-fledged framework, such as introducing a simple rule to contain volatility in spending growth. Structural reforms and fiscal consolidation to address competitiveness challenges. The authorities remain firmly committed to the exchange rate peg (US$1=B$1), which provides an important anchor. They are moving only gradually to reform the CFM system with recent efforts focused on easing personal business transactions and loosening limits on cross-border investments. Staff projections reflect an improvement in the current account over the medium term to around 7 percent of GDP, allowing for modest rebuilding of external buffers. Despite significant uncertainties, the external sector assessment points to an external position that is weaker than suggested by fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex III: External Assessment). Other indicators, such as relatively high energy costs and indicators of the business environment show The Bahamas falling further behind its peers, and the declining share of tourism among Caribbean countries that focus on a relatively expensive, higher-end tourism experience point to persistent structural weaknesses. Reserves appear broadly adequate according to standard metrics, but fall short when taking into account small island specific factors, such as exposure to external shocks and natural disasters. To maintain sustainability of the external position and improve external competitiveness, staff continues to call for structural reform (para 11) and further fiscal consolidation (paras 13, 14, and 15). Authorities’ Views Authorities are committed to further fiscal consolidation to maintain macroeconomic stability and policy credibility. To mitigate the potential impact of the VAT on low-income earners, the * W ee bb bb & * K Page 20 authorities have already raised the minimum wage and increased social spending. They continue to review social assistance benefits, and would prefer to increase them further instead of introducing exemptions that would reduce revenues and compromise the integrity of the VAT regime. Authorities are optimistic that disciplined implementation of reforms to enhance revenue administration will raise significant additional revenue. The authorities recognize the benefits of a comprehensive review of concessions, including those to the tourism sector. Authorities noted that efforts to introduce a medium term framework are moving in the right direction. They are taking steps to modernize their public financial management system and remain committed to gradually moving towards a more robust medium-term fiscal framework. They continue to revamp the accounting systems and to advance other budget reforms. They are open, in principle, to adopting a fiscal rule to restrain expenditure growth, but argue that they first need to create the right administrative conditions to ensure fiscal discipline. While acknowledging that SOEs remain a drain on the budget, authorities expect that ongoing initiatives to increase efficiencies and recent investments will reduce government subsidies. The authorities are committed to rolling out NHI, but are mindful of the need to avoid causing economic disruptions. They consider pension reform, including moving to a defined contribution based regime, an important objective and acknowledge the need to commence public consultation soon. Authorities agreed that comprehensive structural reforms and fiscal consolidation would help enhance competitiveness and build external buffers. The authorities pointed out that the current level of international reserves remain within target levels and argued that an expected improvement in tourism earnings and foreign direct investment, together with structural reforms, will facilitate stable and organic accumulation of reserves.