The Bahamas faces many challenges in boosting its growth potential. First and foremost, the country must attract sufficient tourist demand to fill the large impending increase in supply. Second, labor market rigidities constrain the potential supply of labor in the medium-term. Persistently high unemployment rates suggest the presence of wage rigidities, while business surveys cite a lack of skilled labor as an important constraint to growth. Third, significant impediments to the growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) include (i) limited access to bank loans, training and business development services; (ii) a complex system of land administration that raises business transaction costs; and (iii) weak trade-logistics mechanisms and customs procedures that constrain SME access to external markets. As a result, SMEs are concentrated in low- Page 18 productivity services in less technology and knowledge-intensive areas. Fourth, there are more general constraints to investment. The Bahamas slipped 7 places to 84th place in the 2014 World Bank doing Business Indicators, mostly because other countries made improvements while the Bahamas stood still or worsened slightly. The Bahamas has particularly low rankings in starting a business, getting credit, protecting investors, enforcing contracts, and registering property. There was general agreement between the authorities and staff that achieving stronger growth requires diversifying tourism and the economy more generally. Plans to diversify tourist source markets beyond the eastern seaboard of the US and to promote non-traditional segments such as health care, sports, heritage and religious tourism are being developed. In this regard, the authorities have allocated B$10 million in FY2013/14 to conduct marketing for the Baha Mar resort. Initiatives to strengthen human capital have included the opening of the National Training Agency to provide vocational and technical job training to (school-drop out) young adults, which the authorities showcased as a strong step toward addressing private-sector indentified skills shortages in the workforce, particularly ahead of the opening of Baha Mar and other investment projects in the Family Islands. In addition, the authorities have allocated B$30 million for special education and the transition of the College of The Bahamas to University status. Also, an agriculture college in progress would provide a foundation for the development of the sector. A new policy framework under consideration would enhance the creation and expansion of small and medium sized enterprises and long-term employment opportunities. On the business environment, the authorities intend to make key government agencies more customer-friendly and their services easier to access (e.g., through expanding the e-Government platform). The initial focus would be on improving services in business licensing, real property tax administration, and customs. Stronger economic diversification is being sought through the further development of financial services, agriculture, and port services; and provision of appropriate physical (notably competitive and reliable power) and social infrastructure, including through public-private partnerships (PPPs) — while limiting the associated risks. Pending development of a formal PPPs regulatory framework, they pointed to successful PPP arrangements achieved in recent years, most notably in the case of a $400 million Nassau Airport refurbishing project. Inter-American Development Bank, Country Strategy with the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, 2012–2014 . The document also indicates that about 90 percent of all registered businesses employ fewer than 20 persons. As pointed out in an independent evaluation of the Doing Business survey, care should be exercised when interpreting these indicators given subjective interpretation, limited coverage of business constraints, and a small number of reporters, which tend to overstate the indicators' coverage and explanatory power (see www.worldbank.org/ieg/doingbusiness). Page 19 Staff welcomed the authorities’ plans to develop a comprehensive national development plan (NDP) with technical assistance from the Inter-American Development Bank . The NDP, to be prepared during the first nine months of 2014, would assess the country’s macroeconomic performance, institutions and governance, and propose strategies to accelerate economic, institutional, and social development over the medium term and long run. Within a comprehensive framework, it would craft specific development strategies for (i) sectors with a promising outlook, including tourism, agriculture, port services, and financial services, (ii) individual islands, (iii) human capital, (iv) infrastructure, and (v) effective government.