BHS Government Debt BHS Expenditure BHS Revenue and Grants Caribbean Expenditure Caribbean Revenue and Grants Central Government: Revenues , Grants and Expenditure (percent of GDP) The authorities recognized that comprehensive policies are urgently needed to place the government debt-to-GDP ratio on a declining path and support external stability . Central government debt currently exceeds 50 percent of GDP, which makes The Bahamas a “High Scrutiny” country under the Market-Access Countries (MAC) DSA. The Prime Minister’s 2013/14 Budget Communication to Parliament noted the importance of “fiscal consolidation and lower debt as a means to the attainment of far greater economic and social goals,” as well as the necessity to aggressively seek to enhance revenue performance and to be more cost efficient in government operations. While the Bahamas’ revenue effort remains below regional standards, spending has increased towards the regional average and the fiscal deficit and central government debt have significantly risen in recent years. The authorities agreed that fiscal performance needs immediate strengthening to reduce central government net financing requirements, reverse the increasing debt trajectory, and begin rebuilding depleted policy buffers; all of which would help contain borrowing costs in the economy in the medium term. They also concurred that fiscal consolidation would create space for a healthy expansion of physical and social infrastructure spending, and for higher outlays on human capital. Staff discussed with the authorities a medium-term fiscal framework aimed at achieving a balanced budget and a fall in the debt ratio to some 55 percent of GDP by FY2017/18 from a projected peak of 59 ½ percent in FY2014/15 (Tables 2 and 3). Under the scenario, tax revenue would increase by an annual average of about 0.8 percentage-points of GDP over the next five years, the bulk of which from planned introduction of the VAT; and only moderate Commonwealth of The Bahamas, 2013/14 Budget Communication to Parliament , May 2013. The Bahamas is the only country in the Caribbean that has no corporate income tax; a June 2013 FAD TA report notes that it utilizes only 40 percent of its tax capacity. Page 10 savings would be achieved on government expenditures in view of limited spending flexibility. In this regard, the authorities especially stressed the elevated budgetary cost of basic infrastructure and public utilities in an archipelago of sparsely populated and dispersed islands. (In percent of GDP) Medium-Term Fiscal Framework 1/ FY12/13 FY13/14 FY14/15 FY15/16 FY16/17 FY17/18 Staff Projections Revenue Of which: Net gains from VAT Expenditure Of which: Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Memorandum items: Primary balance 2/ Overall fiscal balance Debt-to-GDP ratio Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Fiscal year ends June 30th. 2/ Defined as revenue and grants minus total expenditure (excluding interest payments). Revenue would rise to about 21 percent of GDP by FY2017/18 from 17 percent of GDP in 2013/14 . The revenue effort is underpinned by several critical measures and reforms, especially (i) the upward revision of various business license fees in July 2013; (ii) introduction of a value added tax (VAT) in July 2014; (iii) establishment of a Central Revenue Agency in the first quarter of 2014; (iv) adoption of Tax Identification Numbers; (v) overhaul of customs administration in the context of a $16.5 million IDB-funded reform project; and (vi) modernization of the real property tax (RPT) system. The Bahamian Customs and RPT departments rely heavily on manual procedures and outdated information systems; as a result, revenue collection is currently estimated at below 50 percent of the potential. Envisaged reforms aim to bring management of the two revenue agencies up to international standards, involving extensive computerization of revenue assessment and collection functions, and introduction of risk-based monitoring of operations. Staff concurred with the authorities that reform of the two revenue departments could yield significant revenue gains. However, given pervasive capacity limitations and the record of low tax compliance, staff urged caution in factoring the anticipated revenue improvements into the medium-term fiscal framework (Tables 3.1 and 3.2). The implementation of the VAT is the cornerstone of the authorities’ fiscal consolidation agenda . The reform will provide a more efficient means to broaden the tax base, increase revenues, and improve the effectiveness of tax administration more generally. The potential revenue yield from a 15-percent VAT is generally estimated at slightly over 7 percentage points of GDP. In The Bahamas, the reform’s net revenue gain is assessed at 2.2 percent of GDP in view of Data on VAT productivity suggest that, on average, 1 percentage point of VAT collects revenue equivalent to about ½ percent of GDP. Page 11 VAT exemptions and other tax reductions expected to be adopted along with the new tax (the hotel VAT rate will be at the regional Caribbean average of 10 percent) and of capacity limitations in revenue management. Other limiting factors in the initial year of the reform include delays in rolling out the public campaign and securing passage of relevant legislation in Parliament, which could complicate the timely acquisition and testing of IT systems needed in both the public and private sectors. The absence of a consumption tax and the lack of local experience in its management would contain the initial revenue gains from the VAT as well. Because of these constraints, staff projects the net revenue gain from the VAT at 1.3 percent of GDP for the initial FY2014/15. The Bahamas: VAT Rate in the Caribbean Region Country Introduction Date Standard Rate (%) Hotel Rate (%) Antigua and Barbuda Barbados Dominica Grenada St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and Grenadines An illustrative “no VAT” scenario shows the fiscal consolidation program veering considerably off track, with the debt-to-GDP ratio already above 60 percent of GDP in FY2014/15 (figure below). Staff underscored setting the VAT base as broadly as possible; and encouraged the authorities to insure that adequate efforts and resources are deployed to secure the timely implementation of the reform. Government Debt Trajectory (In percent of GDP) No VAT FY12/13 FY17/18 Source: The Bahamian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projection FY15/16 FY13/14 FY16/17 FY14/15 Government net lending / borrowing (In percent of GDP) No VAT FY12/13 FY17/18 Source: The Bahamian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projection. FY15/16 FY14/15 FY16/17 FY13/14 International Monetary Fund, Schipke, A., A. Cebotari, and N. Thacker, The Eastern Caribbean Economic and Currency Union: Macroeconomics and Financial Systems, Washington, D.C., 2013. Page 12 The authorities’ fiscal consolidation program also calls for enhanced spending discipline, especially as regards wages, goods and services, and subsidy outlays (Tables 2 and 3). Against a backdrop of more favorable employment prospects for the tourism sector, especially after the opening of Baha Mar, pressure on central government hiring should be manageable beyond 2014, permitting limitation of wage outlays to the last three years’ average of 7.4 percent of GDP. Also, in view of unusually sharp increases in recent years, the growth of spending on goods and services will be strictly limited. In the same vein, the authorities’ medium-term fiscal program assumes some downsizing of the public investment budget given the completion last year of several high-cost road and airport rehabilitation projects. Staff underscored keeping budget transfers and subsidies in check as well; and, to that effect, urged the expeditious implementation of planned reforms of public corporations, including adoption of cost-based pricing for public utilities to reduce these entities’ net financing requirements (Box 1). Reflecting the ongoing and envisaged expenditure-streamlining efforts, total spending is expected to be reduced by 0.8 percent of GDP between FY2013/14 and FY2017/18, to 20.8 percent of GDP. Box 1. Planned Reforms of Selected Public Corporations The Bahamian public corporations (PCs) continue to face significant financial challenges, notably stemming from inefficiencies in operations (e.g., excessive staffing, aged facilities), but also reflecting these entities’ tacit social duty to provide affordable services to all residents including in remote Family Islands. The PCs’ aggregate debt reached 16 percent of GDP at end-June 2013 (10 ½ percent in December 2008). Envisaged reforms aim to begin alleviating the companies’ financial distress. Water and Sewage Corporation (WSC). In recent years, budget support to WSC has averaged B$30-40 million annually (0.4 percent of 2013 GDP). To improve the entity’s operational efficiency and strengthen its financial independence, the company is implementing a number of reforms. These have included organizational restructuring to improve staffing efficiency; increased outsourcing of activity to the private sector to achieve higher operational efficiency; and stepped-up efforts to reduce water leakages, with external technical assistance. Bahamas Electricity Corporation (BEC). Envisaged reforms seek to achieve more competition in the generation and higher efficiency in the distribution of power. Expected to be completed in 2014, they would break the BEC into two new entities. A new generation service company would operate, maintain, repair, and manage BEC’s electricity generation facilities as well as develop new power plants. Planned private sector equity participation would permit involvement of energy sector partners of international repute, as well as adequate resources for capacity building and modernization. A new transmission and distribution company would operate, maintain, and expand BEC’s current electricity transmission and distribution systems. The new entity would be 100 percent government owned, but operated by the private sector under a management contract. Page 13 Staff commended the authorities for their commitment to fiscal consolidation and welcomed their intention to introduce a rule-based fiscal framework. Although they have yet to settle on the specifics of such a framework, the authorities saw the adoption of a fiscal rule as essential to guarding against government fiscal shortsightedness (e.g., policy changes depending on political cycle) and making achievement of medium-term fiscal targets more predictable, taking account of The Bahamas’ country-specific conditions (e.g., small island state, vulnerability to natural disasters). Resorting to a fiscal rule appears appropriate considering the rapid widening of the fiscal deficit and increase in central government debt in the last years. However, a rule-based fiscal framework has considerable transparency demands and requires a comprehensive coverage of fiscal operations; it also needs to strike a reasonable balance between sustainability and flexibility goals, and should make provisions for policy responses to unforeseen economic shocks (for instance, natural disasters). Staff signaled Fund readiness to provide technical assistance.