The lack of fiscal space and modest external buffers constrain the use of demand-side policies to stimulate growth. Notwithstanding capital controls, the exchange rate peg constrains monetary policy. Furthermore, the scope for fiscal stimulus to support the recovery is limited by low international reserves and the need to reverse the debt trajectory. The introduction of the new VAT reaffirmed the authorities’ commitment to medium- term fiscal consolidation. Staff commended the authorities for the introduction of a broad-based VAT on January 1, 2015 with a standard rate of 7.5 percent and very few exemptions. This represents a significant step towards boosting policy credibility, and bolstering market confidence. The implementation of the VAT appears to have been relatively smooth despite some transitional issues that are being resolved. Early indications of its performance are encouraging, and the authorities seem on course to achieving their initial revenue targets. Following the VAT implementation, the authorities should advance other revenue reform measures on which progress had lagged, including modernization of customs and property tax administration, and establishment of a central revenue agency. FY12/13FY13/14FY14/15FY15/16FY16/17FY17/18FY18/19FY19/20Revenue16.317.118.418.819.619.920.120.2Of which: VAT1.52.53.03.03.03.0Expenditure21.720.521.420.920.820.620.620.5 Of which: Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets2.92.62.72.62.62.62.62.6 Memorandum items: Primary balance 2/-3.0-0.8-0.10.61.52.02.22.4Overall fiscal balance -5.4-3.3-3.0-2.1-1.2-0.7-0.5-0.3Debt-to-GDP ratio56.360.963.063.263.263.162.762.1Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Fiscal year ends June 30th. 2/ Defined as revenue and grants minus total expenditure (excluding interest payments). Medium-Term Fiscal Framework 1/ Page 15 Over the medium term, the government proposes to continue its fiscal consolidation efforts. The fiscal position is projected to improve steadily in the medium term as envisaged during the 2013 Article IV consultation, with the fiscal deficit expected to narrow to about 2 percent of GDP in FY2015/16 reaching 0.3 percent in 2019/20. The primary balance is projected to move into a surplus in 2015/16. In addition to enhancing revenue, the government proposes to rein in current spending while keeping capital spending around 3 percent of GDP. The central government debt to GDP ratio will remain elevated, but decline slowly over the medium term as the fiscal position strengthens. Under the baseline scenario of the debt sustainability analysis, central government debt is projected to peak at 63 percent of GDP in FY2014/15, declining marginally thereafter to 62 percent in FY2019/20. Gross financing requirements will decline from 5.7 percent of GDP in FY2014/15 to about 2.0 percent of GDP in FY2019/20. External financing requirement is highlighted as a significant risk to the debt profile, which could be mitigated by the projected strengthening of the external current account in the medium term. The main risks to debt sustainability remain slower than expected growth and weak fiscal efforts (Annex 1). Staff agreed that the pace of consolidation planned by the authorities was broadly appropriate, notably in view of the relatively weak growth outlook. Staff urged the authorities to intensify efforts with regard to the implementation of other tax reforms. Steadfast implementation of the planned fiscal consolidation is key to placing debt levels on a declining path. On the expenditure side, staff welcomed ongoing efforts to tighten spending control, and plans to reform public procurement and payroll management. Currently, the fiscal consolidation plan envisages a small saving on expenditures reform. Accelerated rationalization of current expenditure in the context of a medium–term budgetary framework is therefore warranted to help preserve the hard-won benefits of the VAT and help to restore fiscal and debt sustainability. Staff also urged the authorities to press ahead with plans to introduce fiscal responsibility legislation. SOE reforms would facilitate fiscal consolidation. Staff noted that key state-owned entities continue to record sizable financial losses as a result of their public service mandates, operational inefficiencies and inadequate enabling regulatory framework. In particular, operating costs are notably high, mainly reflecting aged facilities and generous employment policies, while productivity is low. Moreover, SOE tariffs have not kept pace with the cost of service delivery, necessitating continued budget support. For example, government support to both Bahamasair and WSC is expected to reach US$60 million (0.7 percent of GDP) in FY2014/15. Aggregate SOE debt was 16 percent of GDP in FY2013/14. Reforms of these entities are thus critical to stemming the drag on public finances. The large band of uncertainty on the growth outlook calls for continued fiscal vigilance. Staff recommended the identification of contingency measures for meeting fiscal targets, including offsetting measures, should downside risks materialize. Such measures should aim to protect growth enhancing capital spending given the large infrastructure requirements. In addition, with growth remaining tepid, staff underscored that fiscal consolidation is not only needed to achieve fiscal and debt sustainability, but also critical to rebuilding external buffers in the near term, Page 16 and to sustaining the peg. Over the longer term, measures would need to be taken in the area of pensions and health insurance to put these on a fiscally sustainable footing, notably in view of population aging. Authorities Views: The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of the fiscal position, and reiterated their commitment to medium-term fiscal consolidation. They acknowledged the need to further contain expenditure growth, in the context of a medium term budgetary framework, as recommended by staff, especially in light of future aging–related spending. They noted that the recently introduced VAT had started bearing fruit and highlighted outstanding issues that are being resolved, including transitioning of the current VAT administrative structure to a new, fully–fledged central revenue administration (CRA) along with the other major domestic taxes, such as real property tax, business license, and stamp duties. A new CRA is expected to come on stream by end–2015, starting with the co–location of the VAT and Internal Revenue Departments. They also noted that the ongoing modernization of customs and property tax departments will further enhance revenue collections. As for fiscal contingency measures, the authorities indicated that, in the event of revenue underperformance, they could cut current spending, and prioritize capital spending in order to achieve fiscal targets. They acknowledged that the government will continue to support state– owned enterprises, such as the Water and Sewerage Corporation, and Bahamasair, but at manageable levels while making efforts to improve their efficiency. The authorities remain committed to examining options for fiscal responsibility and, based on a soon to be released discussion paper, plan to have a stakeholder consultation on the issue with recommendations to Cabinet later this year. The exchange rate peg and system of capital controls continue to serve The Bahamas well as an anchor for price and financial stability . With a long-standing US$1=B$1 peg, the system has helped deliver real and financial sector stability, facilitating The Bahamas’ comparatively high and rising living standards. However, this peg could likely also pose tensions, with the eventual normalization of U.S. monetary policy, and should the U.S. dollar appreciate further relative to other major currencies. With foreign exchange reserves expected to remain at modest levels over the medium term, improvements in macroeconomic resilience through diversification, including in the tourism sector, are crucial, in light of The Bahamas’ susceptibility to external shocks. Therefore, staff argued that structural reforms to improve competitiveness are even more urgent to avoid placing an excessive burden of adjustment on fiscal policy. Authorities Views The authorities concurred that enhancing competitiveness was crucial for sustainable growth and maintenance of the exchange rate system. They noted recent successes in diversifying the tourism experience in sports, and highlighted progress in enhancing the business environment, in particular, through trade facilitation and online payment of taxes. They recognized that the Page 17 opening of Cuba to U.S. tourists presented new challenges, but viewed that the Bahamian product would be able to compete effectively. The authorities pointed out that the current level of international reserves remain within target levels (US$800–US$850 million, above 90 percent of base money) and further accretion to reserves would depend largely on improvement in tourism earnings, as growth strengthens, as well as from foreign direct investment. They will take measures, should they become necessary, to protect reserves from falling below their target levels.