Since mid-April 2015, major policy slippages have reemerged, worsening considerably the economic outlook. International reserves have underperformed relative to the SMP with confidence in policies slow to return. Furthermore, as modest pressures on the exchange rate manifested itself with the onset of the lean season for foreign exchange receipts, the Office of the President issued a directive in early May fixing the exchange rate at a level overvalued by more than 20 percent compared with prevailing market rates which were slightly overvalued (see the exchange rate assessment in Annex I). The T-bill rates which had started to edge down earlier in the year reversed the trend and recently ticked up to over 20 percent while the commercial banks’ subscription of T-bills in recent auctions dropped drastically rendering the CBG’s intensified open market operations ineffective (Box 2). Box 2. The Gambia: The Impact of Exchange Rate Directives Since late-2012, the Office of the President has issued a series of exchange rate directives. Except for the latest, which was issued in early May 2015 and is still in effect, all directives were lifted after a period of a few weeks to a few months since their imposition. The directives, which were issued as press releases imposing a GMD/$ exchange rate at levels appreciated relative to the prevailing market rates and often accompanied by an initial ban on the shipment of foreign exchange (FX) abroad and other restrictions to eliminate speculation and illegal FX trading. The most recent directive also sets ceiling rates for other major foreign currencies. Compliance by formal FX market participants is monitored through their daily FX returns to the CBG while enforcement agents from the Office of the President monitor closely activities of FX bureaus and other unlicensed dealers. The Gambia: Exchange rate directives, 2012-2015 Market GMD/US$ Targeted Duration of Directive 1. October 22-November 15, 2012 2. June 26-July 15, 2013 3. July 26-August 14, 2013 4. August 14-October 9, 2013 GMD/US$ rate 5. May 4, 2015-present Source: Gambian authorities and Fund staff estimates. rate Overvaluation about 21% about 18% about 8% about 14% about 30% Weekly FX Interbank Market Trade Volumes FX Purchases (in US$) FX Sales The directives have had serious damaging effects on the economy by creating policy uncertainties, loss of confidence and chronic FX shortages, evident from the sharp drop in the volumes traded in the FX interbank market. Recently, FX interbank trade volumes plummeted by over 50 percent after imposition of the directive on May 4 th Notes: 1/ Area shaded in grey represents periods of foreign exchange rate directives. Source: Central Bank of the Gambia. Exchange rate developments at end-April 2015 were in line with the staff’s expectation under the RCF: depreciation pressures were expected to moderate after the disbursement in the 2 nd quarter of budget support grants from the World Bank and African Development Bank. In the most recent weekly T-bill auction, there was an under subscription of over 50 percent. Page 12 Box 2. The Gambia: The Impact of Exchange Rate Directives (concluded) In discussions, the private sector attributed the shortage to a drop in FX inflows from remittances, tourism, and re-export trade. To avert the FX shortage, parallel market trading tends to occur discreetly at exchange rates above those stipulated by the directive. Past experience shows that once the directive is lifted, the likelihood of overshooting is low as agents self regulate the exchange rate movements to prevent directives from re-emerging. Shortages of imported basic commodities due to foreign exchange shortages create inflationary pressure during episodes of directives (CPI inflation figure). Other negative consequences include loss of government revenue from taxes on imports, additional hardship to poor families associated with the lowered dalasi value of their remittances, and increased market risks for the financial sector. Directives also weaken the CBG’s ability to manage the flexible exchange rate by making it difficult for the CBG to accumulate foreign exchange reserves for buffers and for intervention when needed. Weely GMD/US$ Interbank Market Exchange Rate Notes: 1/ Area shaded in grey represents periods of foreign exchange rate directives. Source: Central Bank of the Gambia. CPI Inflation All items Food & non-alcoholic beverages p v p v p v Notes: 1/ Area shaded in grey represents periods of foreign exchange rate directives. Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics. The government’s NDB has been increasing sharply since mid-April 2015 and, together with the inconsistent exchange rate policy, has pushed the SMP off track. Revenue collecti ons remained strong until April, but started slowing down in May as the overvalued exchange rates have lowered the base on which import duties and the VAT on imports are applied. Strong spending pressures have reemerged recently, partly due to delayed implementation of the expenditure saving measures listed in the MEFP of the SMP for 2015, particularly the downsizing of embassies and of the fleet of official vehicles. Extra-budgetary spending magnified pressures. As a result of these policy slippages, the SMP’s end-June NDB indicative target was missed by a wide margin, as were the net international reserves (NIR) and net domestic assets (NDA) indicative targets (Table 8). Implementation of the structural agenda under the SMP is behind schedule thus far (Table 9). The financially distressed state-owned companies (SOEs)—the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC) and Gambia Telecommunications and its subsidiary cellular company (GAMTEL/GAMCEL)—have been unable to remain within their budgeted cash flow. Meanwhile, The Gambia Groundnut Corporation (GGC) was recently directed to sell farmers fertilizer at a price that did not cover its import costs under its new business mandate to market and sell all agricultural products and ensure food security. These SOEs will be an additional fiscal burden in coming months. Page 13