Staff noted that The Bahamas faces several challenges in boosting its growth potential . First, the country must attract sufficient tourist demand to fill the large impending increase in supply. Second, labor market rigidities constrain the potential supply of labor in the medium term. Persistently high unemployment rates suggest the presence of wage rigidities while business surveys cite a lack of skilled labor as an important constraint to growth. Third, there are significant impediments to the growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Fourth, there are more general constraints to investment. The 2015 World Bank Doing Business Indicators ranks The Bahamas 97 out of 189 countries. Moreover, The Bahamas had a Distance to (best practice) Frontier score of 61.37 out of a maximum of 100, indicating much room for improvement. The Bahamas has particularly low rankings in getting credit, protecting investors, and registering property. Persistently high unemployment underscores the need for policies to promote more inclusive growth (Box 2). The Bahamas enjoys a relatively high per capita income (third highest in the Western Hemisphere behind the U.S. and Canada), which has helped to maintain high living standards. However, since the onset of the global financial crisis, the unemployment rate has remained in double digits mostly due to depressed domestic demand and exports and may have contributed to the recent rise in crime rates. There is evidence of significant structural unemployment, which suggests the existence of impediments to job creation and proper functioning of the labor market. Evidence points to skills mismatches, which partly reflects deficiencies in the education system and migration of skilled labor. At the same time, according to the private sector, efforts to hire foreign labor to fill skill shortages are occasionally hampered by difficulties in securing work permits. Moreover, the job content of growth appears relatively low and is compounded by low productivity and high real wages. Inclusive growth policies would also reduce inequality and gender imbalances (Box 2). Income inequality appears relatively high as indicated by the Gini coefficient estimated at 46 percent in 2011. Although the 2014 World Economic Forum’s global gender gap report ranks The Bahamas high in attaining gender balance (35 out of 142 countries), males appear to be lagging in educational attainment, and much more in securing technical and professional jobs. Females, on the other hand, seem to be lagging in political empowerment as indicated by the proportion of women in parliament and cabinet. Page 13 Staff concurred with the authorities on the need to finalize and implement the National Development Plan (NDP). The NDP would assess the country’s macroeconomic performance, institutions, and governance and propose strategies to accelerate economic, institutional, and social development over the medium term and long run. The NDP should review The Bahamas’ economic diversification strategy with a view to exploring scope for increasing value added, including in the tourism sector through deepening linkages with agriculture. In view of the employment and labor market challenges, staff recommended enhancing active labor market policies to foster job creation and deliver more inclusive growth. In the short term, the focus should be on building upon existing vocational and on-the-job training programs, and job placement services, while seeking to attract skilled Bahamians in the Diaspora and easing restrictions on intra- Caribbean labor mobility. In the long term, improving educational outcomes, better alignment of educational curricula with skills demand, aligning wages to productivity, and enhancing the efficiency of labor market regulations and institutions would be essential to increasing productivity and competitiveness. In addition, greater investment in infrastructure and human capital would be necessary to ensure that growth is broad–based and that the benefits are spread more widely. Affordable and dependable electricity supply is critical to maintaining The Bahamas’ image as a high-end tourist destination (Annex 5) . Improving the efficiency of the electricity company could substantially lower energy costs, boost productivity, and facilitate economic diversification over the medium term. There appears to be significant scope for boosting energy efficiency through more efficient generation, appropriate pricing (balancing cost reduction and investment needs), expanding the use of alternative energy sources, and improved monitoring (including the collection of arrears). Advancing far reaching reforms at the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) is key to reigniting growth. The pace of reforms in loss–making public entities, including the BEC, Bahamasair, and WSC, appears to be lagging and could hamper efforts towards alleviating infrastructure bottlenecks and enhancing medium term growth. Staff urged speedy reform of these entities, focusing on lowering operating costs, rationalizing tariffs, increasing capital investment, enhancing the regulatory framework and generally raising the quality and reliability of service. In particular, staff urged the authorities to press ahead with plans to place the electricity company on a commercially–sound basis and to liberalize the regulatory framework. Authorities Views: The authorities fully agreed with staff on the need to promote higher and more inclusive growth, observing in particular that there was an urgent need to reduce the very high youth unemployment rates, thus also helping to stem rising crime rates. They noted that growth has not been strong enough to absorb new entrants to the labor force, but are optimistic that Baha Mar opening and other new projects could potentially lower unemployment. They acknowledged that income inequality is high, but it is partly due to highly paid expatriates, especially in the financial sector. Page 14 They regarded the NDP as critical to their efforts to strengthen and diversify the Bahamian economy and have set up the Bahamas Investment Promotion Agency (BIPA) within the Office of the Prime Minister to spearhead efforts to finalize the NDP. The BIPA would be tasked with monitoring all priority projects in a centralized fashion, ensuring timely implementation. Currently, work on the NDP is focusing on diagnostic studies along several dimensions, including educational policy, the business environment, and policies pertaining to the Family Islands. The authorities also indicated that energy sector policies would be integrated with the NDP to ensure consistency. They are building an agriculture school that would train students in commercial farming, among other activities, which would help reduce food imports. On energy sector reforms, and in addition to those already announced (Annex V), the authorities indicated that they would be outsourcing the management of the Bahamas Electricity Corporation to a private sector company with a mandate to run the BEC on a fully commercial basis. This would imply rationalization of tariffs and employment policies, and laying the basis for increased investment and the modernization of generation plants. In addition, they were considering options to set up an independent regulator for the electricity sector. Transformation of the BEC should lower energy prices, and enhance the competitiveness of the tourism sector.