Building on recent progress. Staff welcomes recent progress in financial sector reforms which address some of the priorities identified in the 2013 FSAP, including further strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework, reporting under the U.S. Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), and implementation of the new Basel II/III regime (see Box 3). Nevertheless, pockets of financial sector vulnerabilities remain. Authorities are encouraged to move expeditiously in strengthening their framework for crisis management and bank resolution. Despite active support in the past, further efforts are needed to put in place and implement a comprehensive plan to address financial difficulties and governance of one state owned bank. Additional scrutiny from global “de-risking” trends. The financial system has been exposed to global “de-risking” trends as reflected in, thus far temporary, interruptions of correspondent banking relations (CBRs) in some institutions (see Box 4: Loss of CBRs). While loss of CBRs has not led to significant disruptions thus far, continued measures could have an adverse impact on the financial sector and the economy as a whole. The financial services sector is relatively large and sophisticated, reflecting the country’s status as an offshore financial center, and accounts Page 21 for more than 10 percent of GDP and 2.7 percent of total employment. However, global “de- risking” trends could lead to even more scrutiny, further reducing the sector’s contribution to growth and employment, and thus complicating efforts to diversify the economy. Addressing challenges from loss of CBRs. In addition to strengthening their overall risk- based framework for regulation and supervision, the authorities have taken several steps to address risks from loss of CBRs. The central bank conducted in June 2015 a survey to gain a better view of correspondent banking activities and the impact of recent measures and plans to reissue the survey in 2016. The Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF) has recently recognized progress made in addressing the deficiencies identified in their previous report. Following the December 2015 onsite mission, an updated report and policy recommendations will be discussed at the CFATF plenary later this year. In advance of the evaluation, the central bank finalized amendments to its AML/CFT Guidelines and introduced new Wire Transfer regulations. The authorities are also actively participating in regional bodies that aim to create collective solutions to loss of CBRs. Looking forward, increased scrutiny calls for effective implementation of AML/CFT regulations and strong efforts to ensure compliance, as well as added emphasizes on the need to keep pace with evolving international standards by promptly addressing any gaps. Continued evaluation of the supervisory and regulatory framework for both banks and non-banks to proactively identify and address risks in a timely and assertive manner is critical. Authorities’ Views Authorities remain committed to further improving their regulatory and supervisory system to ensure financial stability. A state-owned bank engaged a consulting firm to develop and The Bahamas: Financial Sector Stability Assessment Financial Stability Report January-June 2015 nu nu … … Page 22 implement a rehabilitation plan for the bank. The plan will be directed at strengthening risk management, enforcing collection, revising market focus and improving governance. The authorities recognize the challenges stemming from global “de-risking” trends, and expressed their commitment to promptly addressing them. They will continue to monitor the industry, provide assistance to banks and encourage them to take a risk-based approach, and work on any remaining regulatory gaps. The authorities will also continue to coordinate with regional counterparts to mitigate any adverse economic fallout. They also pointed to the already strong overall AML/CFT regime in place, and called for more clarity on regulatory expectations and requirements from international banks and from source jurisdictions. Box 3. Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision: Update 2013 FSAP. The FSAP found no short-term threats to financial stability, independent and strong oversight, and strict firewalls between the domestic financial system and the offshore sector. Nonetheless, the authorities continue to further improve the regulatory and supervisory system: Risk-based supervisory framework/crisis management. The Central Bank of The Bahamas (CBB) and other regulatory authorities continue to work towards strengthening their frameworks. Following IMF technical assistance in 2015, CBB expects to issue a consultation paper that proposes a hybrid, as opposed to purely judicial, approach to bank resolution. Bank stress tests . The latest Financial Stability Report (June 2015) shows that capital adequacy ratios (CARs) are high on average, in excess of 30 percent, and the banking system is resilient to several shocks. For example, even under a scenario with a 200 percent increase in NPLs, CARs remain above the 17 percent regulatory minimum, with the exception of one bank, whose CAR was still above the trigger rate that would have mandated additional capital. Basel II/III. Implementation commenced in 2016Q1. Most foreign-owned institutions already observe Basel III. The first official reporting under the new framework occurred in January 2016 for commercial banks, and end-March for international firms. CBB analysis suggests that banks’ capital levels remain robust also under the new Basel II/III framework, although some individual institutions are “likely to be stressed” by the new requirements. Assuming full implementation of capital conservation buffer (CCB) and total eligible capital, only one bank would fall short. With respect to CCB and countercyclical capital buffer, four banks would not meet the additional requirement. Credit unions. The CBB has assumed regulatory and supervisory authority for the domestic credit union system comprising nine institutions (with assets equivalent to about 3.5 percent of the domestic banking systems’ assets). Upon adoption, credit union deposits have Deposit Insurance Corporation protection. Credit Bureau. Preparatory work continues. Necessary legislation is expected to be presented to the parliament soon with operations starting 12-16 months after legislative approval. U.S. Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). Reporting under FATCA commenced in September 2015. Page 23 Box 4. Loss of CBRs Like other countries in the region, The Bahamas has been impacted by global “de-risking” trends that have resulted in additional scrutiny of financial institutions and, in a few cases, to temporary interruptions in correspondent banking relations (CBRs). All affected institutions have thus far been able to avoid significant disruptions in their services by proactively relying on multiple service providers, switching to alternative providers or negotiating continuation in CBRs. Impact on financial institutions . A total of six institutions, mainly domestic commercial banks and standalone international banks, representing about 19 percent of domestic banking system assets, have recently lost CBRs. All of them either had additional CBRs; found replacements; or were able to negotiate a continuation in service (including against an additional annual fee). Canadian banks and other international banks continue to rely on their head offices and parent banks for CBRs. Money transfer business (MTB) has also been impacted. One domestic bank closed its Western Union money transfer franchise in summer 2015, while another MTB provider has been notified about a possible termination of their banking relationship. Adverse impacts on bank operations have been reflected mainly in prolonged clearance procedures and higher investment and staffing costs stemming from additional reporting requirements and scrutiny. Business segments that have been impacted include credit card payments, cash management services, investment services, clearing and settlement, international wire transfers and remittance services. Reasons for termination . While reasons for terminations of CBRs by global banks have not always been clearly stated, they appear to be driven by stricter application of source country (mainly U.S.) regulations, and more generally, costs related to the changing regulatory environment. The general view is that the costs of AML compliance outweigh the profits generated by CBR services, making it particularly difficult for smaller local institutions with fewer international transactions to maintain their CBRs. Some terminations also appear to be driven by implementation of a risk-based approach. In particular, consistent with experiences across the region, anecdotal evidence suggests that international correspondent banks are uncomfortable providing services to domestic banks that do business with either MTBs or on-line gaming operators (so called “web-shops”), which are perceived as higher risk. Replacements. Replacement CBRs have been provided by other major global banks. Canadian banks present in the domestic market do not seem to be interested in taking over correspondent banking business and alternative service providers, i.e. second tier U.S. based banks, were generally not seen as credible alternatives to traditional providers. Risks. The impact has so far been limited to those institutions that lost CBRs, with no major disruptions in service. However, continued withdrawal of services could create an uncertain environment for business, have adverse implications for the financial sector and negative effects on the economy as a whole. Risks are particularly significant for international banks and MTBs, given their reliance on the international correspondent network to maintain multicurrency payments and settlements. MTBs. While The Bahamas does not rely on remittances as a major source of foreign currency income, termination of services could lead to an increase in the cost or interruption in remittance outflows to other countries in the region. Overall remittance outflows average about 1 percent of GDP in last three years (around $100 million), a small share of incoming remittances in recipient countries (e.g. around 2.5 percent of total in Haiti and 0.4 percent in Jamaica). ________________________________________________ 1/ In an effort to better regulate the online gaming industry, “web-shops” that fulfilled regulatory requirements were issued conditional licenses in November 2015. The Gaming Board, under the supervision of the Ministry of Tourism, has regulatory oversight of the gaming industry (including both casinos and “web shops”). Page 24 Box 4. Loss of CBRs (Concluded) Domestic banking system. While the dominance of Canadian banks, which have not been directly impacted thus far, is likely to play an important stabilizing role for the domestic banking system, additional loss of CBRs could lead to market concentration. Additional costs from maintaining CBRs are likely to be transferred to final customers, leading to higher cost of doing business and hampering access to financial services. Moreover, withdrawal of Canadian banks could cause major disruptions in financial flows and trade finance. Other risks. Further loss of CBRs or higher costs could encourage businesses to move into less regulated parts of the financial system, contributing to the growth of an informal banking system.