Staff concurred with the authorities’ view that the current monetary policy stance remained appropriate. Given the fixed exchange rate, modest reserves, continued slow growth and contained “core”—non-VAT related, non-energy—inflation, neither loosening or tightening would be appropriate in the current circumstances. However, upward adjustments may eventually be required as U.S. policy rates are increased. Staff noted that the Bahamian credit channel remains impeded by a nagging debt overhang . Persistently high NPLs, in the context of the CFM regime, have further limited the local transmission of the expansionary U.S. monetary stance (see also Annex 3). Given the private sector’s sizable loan burdens, subdued employment prospects, and tightened credit requirements, new loan demand creation remained muted amid overall deleveraging. Staff noted recent efforts of the authorities and some banks to address long-standing NPLs, and discussed the potential advantages of establishing a specialized agency, including a possible successor to the government’s Mortgage Relief Plan. Resolving the debt overhang will help preserve financial stability, allow for specialized management to maximize the value of distressed assets and permit banks to focus on their core business of lending, thereby supporting the recovery. Despite facilitating bankruptcy laws, banks remain reluctant for both economic and social reasons to press for accelerated resolution of nonperforming mortgages. Staff noted that excessive time delays and high costs of property registration and inefficiencies in the enforcement of contracts also likely weighed on the resuscitation of bank lending. However, recently introduced rules for civil procedure focused on streamlining court proceedings and promoting less costly dispute resolutions may prove beneficial. Staff welcomed the planned introduction of a new credit bureau, including its broad scope . However, staff noted that while more comprehensive information regarding existing debt obligations and repayment histories would eventually facilitate access to credit, it may initially raise additional lender reluctance if the true level of private sector indebtedness exceeded expectations. The Bahamian financial sector remains well capitalized and liquid, and progress in improving the supervisory framework continues apace. Staff welcomed the results of recent banking system stress tests, which indicated that the majority of banks remain resilient to the most extreme shocks given their very high capital to risk-weighted assets ratios. The authorities are further strengthening their regulatory and supervisory framework, largely in accord with FSAP recommendations (Box 3). Staff also noted that implementation of the Basel framework was on Page 18 track, and that the AML/CFT evaluation was, after some delay, in train. The authorities are encouraged to enhance compliance and effectiveness of the AML/CFT framework in line with the 2012 FATF standard. Authorities Views: The authorities agreed that credit growth will remain subdued, given the weakness in consumer demand, elevated unemployment and as banks continue applying tighter credit standards. They noted that banks were more aggressively writing off and provisioning for bad debts, in some cases incurring sizable losses, and foregoing dividends. A resumption of lending was thought to depend on an improvement in employment prospects, particularly as The Baha Mar resort opens. The resort is expected to employ about 5000 people within 6–7 months of its opening. On the credit bureau, they noted that credit exposures may not be unexpectedly high upon its introduction since banks are conducting due diligence and are dealing with the same set of borrowers. The authorities explained that the government’s previous mortgage relief program required restructuring to enhance its effectiveness. While they noted that banks had already restructured many mortgages, they suggested that a revamped program was still needed and that they intended to re-launch it soon.