SMP Projections Adverse scenario Fiscal External Adverse scenario SMP Projections in months of next year's imports Active policy scenario (new baseline) Active policy scenario (new baseline) (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Current account balance Gross official reserves Primary balance Net domestic borrowing Budget support grant Public debt 1/ Source: Staff estimates. 1/Under the adverse scenario, public debt in percent of GDP temporarily becomes lower than other scenarios at end-2015 because the exchange rate is fixed at a level overvalued by 30 percent until end-2015 and dalasi value of external debt dips as a result. The imposition of the exchange rate directive has already damaged the near-term outlook and increased vulnerabilities. Even if the exchange directive is lifted immediately, the revenue loss compared to Key macroeconomic indicators under SMP projections, active policy scenario (new baseline), and adverse scenario the RCF baseline would reach 1¼ percent of GDP in 2015. Recently remerged spending pressures will also weigh on the government’s NDB. Notwithstanding a number of efforts to improve its finances, NAWEC’s cash flow has already come under strain in the first half of the year. These developments and the higher-than-budgeted fuel prices it will face in the second half of the year indicates that it could run an operational loss of about 1½ percent of GDP. Similarly, GAMTEL and GAMCEL are expected to run an operational deficit of around ¼ percent of GDP each in 2015 due to its shrinking customer base. As a result, even if the authorities rescind the directives immediately and implement all short-term fiscal saving measures recommended by the staff in addition to those committed under the SMP (see ¶ 17–18), the NDB is expected to reach 5¼ percent of GDP in 2015, compared with the target of 1 percent of GDP under the SMP. Under the staff proposed scenario where the authorities implement all medium-term consolidation measures recommended by the staff (see ¶ 22–23) in addition to the above-mentioned short term measures, the total public debt dynamics for the next several years has worsened compared with the previous DSA presented at the time of the RCF request—the public debt ratio at end-2020 would remain at around 80 percent of GDP (Figure 2, text chart in ¶ 11). The short maturity and higher domestic debt stock has heightened further the risk of public debt distress. However, external public debt dynamics remain largely unchanged from those presented in the DSA at the time of the RCF request (see IMF Country Report No. 15/104 , Supplement 1) and risk of external debt distress remains moderate (Figure 3). Temporary disruptions of foreign exchange supply and import activity would lower the real GDP growth in 2015 and raise inflation in coming months compared with the baseline projection presented at the time of the RCF request. Furthermore, the gross international reserves’ import coverage is expected to remain below 3 months until end-2015 even with strong near-term corrective policy actions. The Gambia’s eroded policy buffers have significantly increased its vulnerability. Notwithstanding very weak policies, on account of its strong international reserves position in 2012, Budget support grants in 2015 under the revised baseline would be lower by about 2 percent of GDP than the SMP projection (see ¶18). Page 14 NIR (US$ million) CBG Net International Reserves (NIR), US$million, Dec. 20 11 - July 2015 when policy implementation began to deteriorate, The Gambia has been able to avert a full-blown crisis thus far. However, now its elevated public debt level, severely eroded international reserves, and the very high domestic borrowing costs have materially altered the situation. This is illustrated in the staff’s primary downside scenario below which assumes that the exchange directive is not rescinded until end-2015, spending pressures remain unchecked, the measures to address the financial difficulties of public enterprises—other than the short-term budget control measures by NAWEC and GAMTEL/GAMCEL for 2015—are not implemented, and the expanded business mandate for the GGC remains in place. Source: Gambian authorities and Fund staff estimates. TREND LINE In the event that the directive is not immediately rescinded and the fiscal slippages are left unaddressed, The Gambia’s external viability and fiscal sustainability will be put at grave risk. Under this scenario: (Percentage of GDP) Public Debt Lower revenue, higher interest payments, and loss of the expected budget support grants would lead to a sharply higher NDB than envisaged under the SMP: NDB could exceed 13 percent of GDP in 2016 (Figure 4). Fiscal sustainability over the medium-term would be severely jeopardized: if the fiscal spending pressures and financial difficulties of key public enterprises continue to be unaddressed, the total public debt to GDP ratio is estimated to exceed 160 percent by 2018 (see text chart). Given the recent history of repeated RCF Baseline Alternative Active Policy Sources: Gambian authorities and Fund staff estimates. Remittances (In percentage of GDP) ECOWAS Average without The Gambia Gambia, The imposition of the exchange directives, economic agents will be reluctant to surrender their foreign exchange, exacerbating the shortage in foreign exchange supply already being observed. As a result, the external reserve position is expected to fall to about 1¼ months of import cover by end-2015, far below the 4 months of imports targeted under the SMP. 2005A1 2006A1 2007A1 2008A1 2009A1 2010A1 2011A1 2012A1 2013A1 2014A1 Sources: Fund staff estimates The parallel market spreads would continue to widen until the exchange rate directive is rescinded and thereafter, the exchange rate would quickly depreciate. As a consequence, the Page 15 external public debt ratios would rise rapidly. Policy slippages will impose heavy social and economic costs. The shortage in foreign exchange supply will heighten inflationary pressures in coming months by reducing the supply of imported basic goods. The Gambia is heavily dependent on remittances (see text chart), and particularly among the poor, the lowered dalasi value of their remittances would hit hard, adding to their economic difficulties associated with higher inflation. Such developments would also significantly increase The Gambia’s vulnerabilities given its exposure to natural disasters, and also to global economic developments, particularly a potential slowdown in advanced economies which are the sources of tourism receipts and remittances to the country (Table 10). In the absence of urgent corrective action, the social progress made in recent years would also be under threat. In the downside scenario presented in ¶11 , the interest payment could consume almost 50 percent of government revenue by 2016, leaving no space for poverty reduction and growth oriented spending. Furthermore, inflation would rise and hit the poor particularly hard as illustrated in ¶11 The authorities were divided on the likely medium-term outlook and assessment of associated risks. While many government officials agreed with the staff’s projections and assessment, other senior officials expressed a different view, especially as regards the efficacy of the exchange rate directives. They argued that the level at which the exchange rate had been fixed was broadly adequate and it would benefit the poor segment of the population by containing inflation.