Growth is expected to strengthen over 2015–16 with the improvement in U.S. activity and the opening of Baha Mar, but significant structural impediments remain . Staff estimates potential GDP growth at about 1½ percent over the medium term, insufficient to generate a significant reduction in the high unemployment rate. Structural impediments, including in the labor The new EBA-lite methodology suggests a 38 percent depreciation in the real effective exchange to close the current account gap, although adjusting the current account deficit by the one-off nature of the Baha Mar project as well as “normal” FDI-related imports reduces the estimated overvaluation to 7½ percent. 1000246810121416182004Q32006Q32008Q32010Q32012Q32014Q3 Private Credit/GDP (right) NPLs/Total Loans Deposit rate Lending rate Private Sector Credit, NPLs, and Interest Rates Sources: Central Bank of Bahamas; and Statistics Office. Share of Caribbean Tourist Arrivals Page 11 market and the energy sector, imply that significantly higher growth than currently projected will be required to absorb new entrants to the labor force and reduce the unemployment rate to single digits over the medium term. However, the full opening of Baha Mar and two smaller projects would increase hotel room inventory by about 20 percent, and together with the strengthening U.S. economy could represent a major boost to exports and the near-term growth outlook. Nonetheless, staff growth projections are tempered by the significant risk that Baha Mar would cannibalize arrivals to other Bahamian destinations unless existing structural challenges are addressed. The improvement in activity from lower oil prices is broadly offset by VAT introduction and ongoing private sector deleveraging. U.S. dollar appreciation is expected to have only a marginal impact on activity, given the peg and dominance of the U.S. as a trading partner. Beyond 2016, growth tapers off as U.S. growth decelerates over the medium term, and the base effects from the opening of Baha Mar fade. Inflation is expected to remain low over the medium term, but VAT implementation early this year would add an estimated 2½ percentage points to the CPI. Over the medium term, the external current account deficit returns to single digits as construction-related outflows are anticipated to be replaced by a rise in travel services receipt. Risks continue to be tilted to the downside although with considerable uncertainty (see Table 8). Spillover risks to The Bahamas stem mainly from the U.S. economy, mostly through the trade and financial channels, but oil price shocks are also important (Annex 3). While the offshore financial system remains substantial, the 2012 FSAP concluded that the domestic financial sector’s susceptibility to offshore spillovers is limited (Annex 4). Nonetheless, the eventual normalization of U.S. monetary policy could further strengthen the dollar, worsening the external competitiveness of The Bahamas vis-à-vis non-U.S. dollar pegged competitors. This, together with adverse shocks to the U.S economy, weaker than projected activity in the global economy, and a disappointing Baha Mar performance would dampen economic recovery, make fiscal consolidation challenging, and weigh on the current account and foreign reserves. However, the net effects of these adverse risks on the external balance are uncertain, as the winding down of Baha Mar construction and lower oil prices are expected to reduce imports going forward. VAT implementation setbacks, and a weak fiscal consolidation generally, could undermine the authorities’ policy credibility, and heighten risks to long-term debt sustainability and the country’s credit rating. The persistently elevated non-performing loan (NPL) ratio poses a tail–risk threat to financial sector stability. Meanwhile, the recent rapprochement in U.S./Cuban relations poses an as yet un-quantified risk to the economic model of many tourism-based Caribbean economies. 910BahamasBarbadosBelizeJamaicaSt. LuciaTrinidad and Tobago Real GDP Growth Under Alternative Scenarios, 2013-18 (average, percent) Absorb new entrants 50% unemployment reduction Page 12