Economic activity is expected to pick up more strongly from 2014 onward as the US recovery accelerates and Baha Mar starts operations. As the fiscal deficit narrows over the medium term, supported by ongoing consolidation efforts, and tourism activity picks up, the external current account balance should strengthen as well, reducing pressures on foreign reserves. Despite upside potential in the medium term, risks to the near-term outlook appear tilted downwards. Growth is expected to pick up over the medium term, reaching 2¾ percent in 2015–16, while inflation is expected to remain subdued: Demand should recover more strongly from 2014 onward as the US economic recovery accelerates, raising stopover tourist arrivals. Investment is projected to remain strong in the near term, but then to tail off as the Baha Mar project reaches a conclusion. Private consumption growth is expected to be close to zero through 2014, as the ongoing fiscal consolidation (Section A) and private deleveraging (below) take a toll (staff projections assume a current-year fiscal multiplier of ½ and a second-year multiplier near zero, in line with findings for Caribbean islands). However, consumption should gain strength as the pickup in the tourism sector The multipliers estimates are based on a panel regression on 14 Caribbean countries including The Bahamas in Narita, Fiscal Multipliers in the Caribbean , in International Monetary Fund, and Amo-Yartey and Turner-Jones (Eds), Caribbean Renewal: Tackling Fiscal and Debt Challenges , forthcoming in 2014. Page 7 bolsters employment and incomes, and this should help offset the impact of declining investment, as the Baha Mar project reaches its conclusion. A key factor underlying medium-term projections is the expected expansion in supply. The full operation of Baha Mar could allow for an increase of almost 10 percent in total arrivals; and two smaller hotel projects planned on Grand Bahama and Bimini islands could add another 2¼ percent in arrivals. Growth performance will also depend on success in addressing a number of parallel supply challenges going forward, including expanding incoming airlift capacity; addressing infrastructure bottlenecks; strengthening the linkages between tourism and other sectors; and developing a more diversified tourism experience, including ongoing plans to boost sports and health care-based tourism. Inflation is expected to remain low, but planned VAT implementation in 2014 would add an annualized 3½ percentage-points to the CPI (as reflected in staff’s baseline projections). In the financial sector, the medium-term outlook is for modest growth in bank lending as the private sector adjusts its balance sheet, and banks deal with continuing problem loans. Mortgage lending growth is likely to be limited: residential investment fell by one third in nominal value during 2008–12 and ongoing deleveraging is expected to continue. Accordingly, private sector demand for bank credit would remain subdued. And with tighter bank lending standards, the recent fall in nominal private credit may be only slowly reversed. The stock of NPLs appears to have peaked and is expected to slowly decline as well, with banks more willing to write off some NPL categories (e.g., unsecured consumer debt), while continuing to find other flexible arrangements to deal with nonperforming mortgages (which comprised 58 percent of the NPL portfolio at end-June 2013) in light of continuing softness in the real estate market. Overall, however, banks’ balance sheets remain robust and near term stability risks are limited (Table 6–7 and Figure 5). The external account balance should strengthen over the medium term, replenishing official reserves. The Bahamas’ exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with macroeconomic fundamentals, although the declining reserve position does raise some external stability concern (Section B below). Nonetheless, the completion of Baha Mar would reduce construction imports and boost tourism services exports. Overall, a decline in the investment/GDP ratio is projected against a recovery in the saving rate––mostly the result of higher fiscal saving. With the current account deficit thus projected to revert to lower, pre-global crisis and pre-Baha Mar levels, net external financing needs would be contained, strengthening foreign reserves and external stability. Supported by the authorities’ budget consolidation efforts, the fiscal position is projected to steadily improve in the period ahead. Last July, the authorities instituted new and/or increased various business license fee rates applicable to on- and off-shore financial institutions, and to state-owned enterprises; and introduced a new environmental levy and customs processing fees. These are expected to be complemented by a VAT in July 2014. With regard to spending, the authorities are implementing stronger controls, including on wages and goods and services outlays in view of the excesses in the run up to the last general elections. Page 8 With the primary budget projected to be balanced by FY2014/15 (from a projected deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP for FY2013/14) and to move into surplus beyond, central government debt would be contained and set on a declining path over the medium term. There are however downside risks . Central government debt is projected to peak at nearly 60 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2014/15, but to decline to 55 percent of GDP by fiscal year 2017/18. However, the forecast track record shows a tendency toward optimism in staff forecasts of real GDP growth and the primary balance, pointing to downside risks to the baseline scenario. This underscores the need for rigorous adherence to the ongoing fiscal consolidation program (DSA, Annex I). Despite upside potential in the medium term, risks to the outlook appear tilted downwards (Risk Assessment Matrix, page 20). The Bahamas faces a number of internal and external risks, but the following risks could be especially disruptive, highlighting the need for timely implementation of plans for fiscal consolidation and economic diversification: Disappointing Baha Mar performance. Baha Mar’s success critically hinges on effective implementation of the project’s strategic positioning (e.g., more focus on high-end products, more diversification to Europe, South America and East Asia) in the region’s fiercely competitive tourism market. While staff’s baseline is conservative about Baha Mar’s growth impact, and the project was based on a thorough feasibility study, significantly lower-than-assumed net tourist arrivals or expenditure relating to the project would limit the upside boost to domestic economic activity. In a tail risk scenario where the project completely fails to raise overall tourism exports, the uptick in growth currently projected for 2015 onward would not materialize, with adverse implications for fiscal revenues and the public debt outlook (the project entails no direct fiscal risks as it is entirely financed by foreign private sources). If the project did fail to deliver, there could also be significant pressure on reserves, and maintaining external and internal stability would then require a more aggressive approach to structural fiscal consolidation. Delay in fiscal consolidation. Delays in implementing fiscal consolidation, especially tax revenue reforms, could pose risks to long-term debt sustainability and the country’s investment grade credit rating. In affirming its rating of The Bahamas (BBB/A-2, with a negative outlook) in November 2013, Standard and Poor’s warned that the agency could lower the rating by one or two notches if the authorities do not take additional action to reduce the fiscal deficit and arrest the increase in debt to GDP over the next several years. If revenue reforms do not deliver, the authorities would need to implement deeper spending cuts to help hold debt down. Lower than anticipated emerging market (EM) growth potential. With the tourism strategy aimed at exploiting arrivals in part from EM countries, a further slowdown of EM growth would undercut the growth outlook. That said, the negative impact could be tempered by an accompanying decline in fuel prices. If tourism demand from new markets proves stagnant, the authorities may need to pursue ambitious structural reforms to help reduce the internal price level and draw in more demand from existing markets. Page 9