Macroeconomic policies geared towards stability. The nature of The Bahamas as a small, open island economy with a strong commitment to a fixed exchange regime and an extensive capital flow management (CFM) system, as well as limited policy buffers, leaves the authorities with few macroeconomic policy tools. In this context, monetary policy is constrained by the eventual increase in U.S. interest rates and fiscal policy needs to be geared primarily towards ensuring debt sustainability. Against this background, continued fiscal policy tightening centered on reducing current expenditure, while protecting necessary social spending, would be the main policy lever to respond to external shocks. Fiscal consolidation in the low growth environment. The VAT reform has made an important contribution to maintaining macroeconomic stability and strengthening policy credibility. Authorities expect that strong VAT collection, together with reforms to enhance revenue administration raising additional revenue of up to 2½ percent of GDP, will contribute to significant consolidation in the near-term. However, with weaker than expected growth weighing on revenue collection, the authorities’ plan that seeks to reduce the FY2015/16 fiscal deficit to 1.5 percent of GDP and to achieve a near balanced budget by 2017/18 appears too optimistic. Staff projections suggest a still significant, but more realistic and growth friendly pace of consolidation, with the fiscal deficit projected to narrow to 3 percent, in FY2015/16. The fiscal deficit is expected to decline further in FY2016/17, albeit at a slower pace, with debt stabilizing at around the same time. Credible reforms to ensure fiscal responsibility, including decisive steps towards a medium-term budget framework (para 15), would allow fiscal policy to better balance the need for continued consolidation and support for the recovery in the near-term. Investing in growth-enhancing infrastructure. To support near-term economic activity, staff sees room for shifting spending away from current spending and towards more productive and growth-friendly infrastructure spending. Priorities include efficient investment in information and communication technology, transportation, public utilities, as well as projects that support economic diversification, increase domestic value added in the dominant tourism sector and enhance resilience to natural disasters. Using responsible public-private partnerships, where relevant, can help reduce the burden of higher investment on government finances. j Page 16 Structural reforms to lift potential, reduce unemployment, and enhance competitiveness. Staff estimates that negative TFP growth and smaller contributions from both capital accumulation and labor have contributed to a significant decline in potential growth since 2000 (see Box 2). Moreover, the non-accelerating rate of unemployment has been consistently increasing over the same time period (see Figure 1). Alternative indicators of competitiveness point to persistent weaknesses, such as elevated energy costs and high costs of doing business. The authorities have completed a comprehensive State of the Nation diagnostic that identifies a broad strategy for structural reforms, a first step towards completing their National Development Plan (NDP). The next steps, expected to be completed later this year, include further national dialogue and development of a comprehensive package of specific reform measures. Many structural measures, such as fundamental state-owned enterprise (SOE) reforms, will take time to bear fruit. Staff therefore argued for an urgent shift towards implementation of growth-friendly structural reforms, focusing on the following main priorities: Strengthening the business environment. Reforms to improve the ease of doing business should focus on strengthening contract enforcement and frameworks for resolving insolvencies and registering property, improving access to credit, and alleviating the administrative burden and time necessary to start a business. Raising human capital and reducing skill mismatches. Enterprise surveys suggest that the main business obstacle cited by firms is an inadequately educated workforce. Policies should aim at improving productivity through better educational outcomes, further strengthening existing apprenticeship and vocational training programs, easing restrictions on labor mobility and seeking to reverse the “brain drain” of skilled Bahamians. Improving competitiveness through reducing costs. Policies should aim at reducing energy and other utility costs and better aligning wages with productivity. Staff urged the authorities to advance state-owned enterprise (SOE) reforms, including reducing the entities’ operational inefficiencies, fostering an enabling regulatory environment and aligning tariffs with costs of service delivery. Regular financial reporting and consistent monitoring are also essential to ensuring accountability. Staff welcomed recent steps towards energy sector reform. An external management company is coming on board and parliament has passed legislation for reforming the loss-making Bahamas Electricity Company, establishing an independent regulator, and refinancing legacy debts and fund capital improvements. Staff argued that reforms should be extended to other SOEs, including Bahamasair and the Water and Sewerage Corporation. tt tt bb W Page 17 Policies to revive credit growth. Staff noted that discussions between the government and banks about placing distressed mortgage assets in special purpose vehicles (SPVs) have been protracted, owing in part to social concerns. Resolving debt overhang in a timely and socially responsible manner would help unlock resources for private sector financing, thereby supporting growth and further strengthening financial stability. In this context, the authorities should consider implementing a comprehensive framework for resolution that may include, inter alia, the establishment of a specialized agency. Work on establishing a credit bureau, which could eventually improve well-grounded access to credit, continues. Prompt finalization of this work is key, given that more time will be required to build comprehensive information regarding existing debt obligations and repayment histories. Authorities’ views Authorities affirmed that they remain on track to achieve their deficit target in FY2015/16, pointing to tighter spending control and seasonality in the collection of business license fees and property taxes. Authorities expect to reallocate spending items to accommodate costs related to Hurricane Joaquin, with reconstruction spanning several years. They argued that room for increasing capital spending in the near term was constrained by project execution capacity. Authorities expect to achieve further reduction of the deficit to below 1 percent next year mainly through modernization of revenue administration, stronger enforcement efforts and spending control. Authorities were optimistic that new investment projects coming on stream in the near term have the potential to boost growth and lower unemployment. Authorities nevertheless fully agree with the need to design and implement an ambitious growth strategy, acknowledging that weak competitiveness, low productivity and high costs of doing business are hampering growth. They see the NDP as a critical device to strengthen and diversify the economy. Finally, the authorities recognized the need for a decisive and timely resolution of NPLs. They noted that banks have been more aggressive recently in restructuring and other forms of mortgage relief and customer assistance programs. The authorities admitted that progress has been slow, but that they continue to work closely with banks on a new framework for resolution.