Fiscal policy deteriorated since end-2010…. Fiscal deficits and public debt levels have increased in 2011 and 2012 . The overall fiscal deficit more than doubled to 7.2 percent of GDP during 2012 largely on account of the adoption of an expansionary budget in the context of planned elections. At the same time, financing from privatization and budget support fell well short of budget plans and, as fuel subsidies rose to 2.1 percent of GDP, unpaid bills accumulated at end-2012. Meanwhile, the public debt-to-GDP ratio increased and is estimated at around 45 percent of GDP at end-2012, including on account of government recognition of old domestic liabilities of bankrupt public enterprises and arrears to pension funds. The 2013 approved budget was also expansionary and subject to risks that eventually materialized. Unrealistically high capital spending, allocations for legislative and municipal elections and higher wages contributed to an overall balance deficit of almost 11 percent of GDP in the A staff-level agreement was reached in early September 2013. However, presentation of the authorities’ request to the IMF Executive Board has been delayed to allow them to complete agreed prior actions. Page 11 adopted budget. In addition, financing was predicated on unrealistically high privatization proceeds. Budget execution pressures built up immediately, as bank privatization did not yield the projected revenue, fuel subsidies over the first quarter absorbed almost the entire allocation for the year, and the anticipated external financing did not materialize. Meanwhile, additional outlays were required to fully finance election operations which saw cash flow pressures increase further by mid-2013. ...but the authorities’ now intend to follow a strong adjustment path In the face of these challenges, the authorities adopted a revised 2013 budget and subsequently took further action to keep the fiscal deficit under control. The revised budget, adopted in consultation with Fund staff, is more realistic as it provides for lower capital expenditures, better aligned with execution capacity, higher allocations for fuel subsidies, and more realistic privatization revenue estimates. Staff advised the authorities that, since neighboring countries are adopting pricing policies yielding higher fuel prices and enforcement efforts have been strengthened, smuggling to Togo is now reduced which results in higher official imports and subsidy outlays. To curb the heavy subsidy bill, staff proposed a phased increased in fuel prices— except for kerosene, which is mostly consumed by the poor—by 5 percent in September 2013, and in January 2014, with accompanying targeted measures to protect the most vulnerable. The authorities are instead inclined to adopt temporary exemptions on income tax for transporters and on imports of selected essential foodstuff. They also plan to expand the school-feeding program. These measures will be finalized during consultations with domestic stakeholders. Staff proposed that fiscal policies should aim at reducing debt distress vulnerabilities and be anchored by an improvement of the domestic primary fiscal balance. A return to positive territory would allow the authorities to generate the fiscal space to meet their infrastructure needs and implement their social policies, while reducing the debt burden. At the same time, the overall fiscal deficit should be carefully monitored, and overall debt policies guided by close adherence to a strengthened medium-term debt strategy (¶20) and a regular update of the debt sustainability analysis. The authorities agreed with the approach proposed by staff to define their fiscal stance. Their current policies thus target a return to positive primary domestic fiscal balances and the reduction of the overall fiscal deficit in 2014 and the medium term. Their fiscal objective is to enhance fiscal sustainability by reducing the overall deficit to around 5¼ percent of GDP in 2014 and below 4 percent by 2016, while returning to a balanced primary domestic balance in 2014 and to a positive primary domestic balance slightly below 2 percent by 2016. To signal their commitment The authorities report tax revenue inclusive of tax exemptions. Staff’s presentation of Togo’s fiscal accounts excludes such tax exemptions from revenue. To enhance transparency, the recorded tax exemptions are reported as a memorandum item. A phased increase would give time to assess smugglers’ reaction to a higher price differential with Nigeria and Ghana, sources of smuggled fuel. Volumes consumed on the official domestic markets tend to decline the higher the price differentials. Page 12 to fiscal prudence, the authorities chose to frontload fiscal adjustment, as the deficit reduction in 2013 accounts for one-third of the projected adjustment during 2013-16. The projected fiscal adjustment is predicated on the implemention of the authorities’ policy objectives. The reduction in current spending reflects the objectives to cut back on oil subsidies during 2013-2015—as discussed above—and to limit the nominal growth of the wage bill to somewhat below the nominal growth of GDP in the medium-term. On the revenue side, the ongoing reforms in revenue administration are expected to usher a continuation of improvements in revenue collection (see below). However, the deficit levels for 2014 and beyond could still raise financing challenges. The possible adoption of a Fund-supported program could help catalyze development partners’ budget support, which, together with recourse to the regional financial market, would help close projected financing gaps. Staff emphasized that reconciling fiscal sustainability with developmental and social objectives will require significant improvements in public expenditure planning and efficiency, and continued efforts to enhance revenue collection. While noting the considerable pressures they are facing from unions on wage increases, the authorities reiterated their intention to resist the pressure, except for those portions that can be accommodated within the current medium-term spending envelope. Once again at the beginning of the school year, the unions demanded wage, benefits, and employment increases. Staff emphasized the importance of moving away from ad-hoc yearly negotiations and instead adopting a comprehensive strategy of public sector employment and remuneration that is consistent with the authorities’ medium-term fiscal framework and sector strategies, particularly for education and health. Staff cautioned the authorities that, if wage demands were to be accommodated beyond the current allocations in the framework, the appropriate first-best policy adjustment would be to lower other budget expenditures. The authorities concur with the staff that the progressive elimination of fuel subsidies would be a key driver of any fiscal adjustment. However, they are concerned that the current political and social situation is too tense for drastic changes. Staff pointed to the example of Ghana which has recently eliminated fuel subsidies by increasing prices and reestablishing an automatic adjustment mechanism that aligns future changes with the fluctuation of world oil prices and exchange rates. The Togolese authorities now expect to be in position to reduce fuel subsidies by about 1 percent of GDP in 2014, after they have reached an agreement with unions on pay packages. While staff agreed that fuel subsidies can be eliminated only gradually, it underscored the importance of strategically disseminating information to the public on their fiscal cost and regressive impact, as well as the opportunity cost in terms of foregone social and infrastructure spending. There was some divergence of views regarding the pace of scaling up investment spending . The authorities’ concern is that the 1990s crisis has left a legacy of underinvestment in infrastructure that is holding back potential growth. They argued that the protracted and deep nature of the crisis has left them with a wider infrastructure gap than other countries in the region, and that only by significantly scaling up investment can they accelerate economic growth and development. Staff emphasized that prioritizing and effectively executing capital expenditures Page 13 through enhanced planning and project implementation capacity is more important than increasing allocations for project spending. Therefore, it was prudent to create more fiscal space and progressively increase capital spending in line with improvements in the authorities’ capacity to plan and execute projects. Staff noted that the practice of issuing guarantees on the scheduled amortization of bank pre-financing of government contractors for infrastructure projects has reduced transparency and effectively tied down large portions of allocations for investment spending in future years, thus curtailing room to prioritize in future budgets. The authorities intend to raise tax revenue further. In the short term, gains in revenue collections can be sustained by increased reliance on risk-based assessment of imports and tighter monitoring of entitlements to exemptions. The authorities’ plan to sustain their revenue effort in the medium term hinges on the successful launch of the revenue authority ( Office Togolais des Recettes —OTR). Once established, the OTR should deliver efficiency gains by hiring new and more qualified personnel, shedding excess staff, and exploiting synergies among domestic- and import- related tax functions under a common strategic direction. Staff noted that pushing ahead with on- going and programmed reforms in the tax and customs administrations remains important, notwithstanding the on-going creation of the OTR. Better public financial management (PFM) should improve government efficiency and transparency . Implementation of the authorities’ medium-term expenditure framework will require careful alignment of policies with reform priorities. Staff noted that the execution of the authorities’ PFM reform plan is experiencing some delays related to both limited capacity and resistance from some administrative units. The authorities also noted that, in the low capacity environment of a fragile country, it is often difficult to reach consensus of reform priorities and align all government units to effectively implement them. Staff and the authorities discussed a number of measures to reinvigorate the PFM agenda. These include: (i) first steps towards establishing a single treasury account; (ii) a more effective cash projection and management system at the treasury; and (ii) better prioritization, execution and monitoring of investment projects. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that Togo remains at moderate risk of debt distress (Supplement II). There has been considerable debt accumulation over the past two years as the fiscal situation deteriorated. The increase in external debt has been mainly driven by new loans from multilaterals and non-Paris Club bilateral creditors. In light of the projected increase in public investments, Togo’s external public debt is expected to increase in the near future, accumulating to around 22 percent of GDP by 2016. Under baseline assumptions, which are more favorable than historical trends, overall debt indicators are projected to remain below the relevant thresholds in the 20-year period. Nonetheless, there is need to closely monitor the trajectory of public debt, with increased focus on debt contracted from domestic sources, given the country’s low debt management capacity. Strengthened debt management and policies are essential to ensure debt sustainability and reduce vulnerabilities . The authorities and staff discussed options to raise the functional profile and capacity of the Public Debt Directorate, including its human and physical resources. The authorities currently compile an annual debt strategy, but this should be Page 14 strengthened to establish a medium-term strategy that is aligned with the budget process and the medium-term expenditure framework. Staff pointed out that under present circumstances, there were risks of losing control over debt management and new debt, unless the present deficiencies are addressed in a forceful manner. The authorities shared the view that debt management was in need of substantial improvements and asked for additional technical assistance. In the staff’s view, Togo should continue to borrow on concessional terms until its debt management capacity has considerably improved, and closely monitor domestic debt dynamics. The DSA shows that Togo remains at moderate risk of debt distress, combined with low institutional capacity. At around 45 percent of GDP, its total public debt at end-2012 is above the average level for relevant comparator groups in Sub-Saharan Africa, i.e., fragile states that benefitted from HIPC (39.1 percent of GDP) and low-income countries (34.4 percent of GDP). The authorities emphasized that concessional financing is not available in amounts sufficient to meet their urgent development needs. Thus, they are exploring with potential lenders and development partners the possibility of contracting financing packages with a fully concessional grant element of 35 percent or higher that are also consistent with the currently projected DSA.