The large current account deficit poses a risk to external stability 23 24 This is related to the relatively loose fiscal stance and high level of private and public investment. Togo’s current account deficit has been mainly financed by concessional lending and grants. Increased use of commercial sources of financing render Togo more vulnerable to economic developments in key non-concessional lenders, such as China. Different assessments of the real exchange rate point towards an overvaluation between 7 and 14 percent (Text Table 5). CA model External Sustainability IREER Current Account/GDP Norm Underlying Text Table 5: Exchange Rate Assessment (EBA-lite) 1/ Positive value indicates overvaluation Real Exchange Rate Gap 1/ Even though Togo’s exports are fairly diversified, they are concentrated in low value-added products such as raw materials and re- exports. Main exports are mining products such as phosphate and clinker, cash-crops with low transformation such as cotton and cocoa, cement, and re- exports (oil-related products, vehicles, Text Figure 14. Togo: Exports Composition by Products (In percent of GDP) Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. Mining Agricultural Cement Oil-related Transportation material Fertilizers, cosmetics Textiles Metals Other industrial Other The EBA-lite exchange rate assessment includes three approaches. The current account (CA) model and the index of the real exchange rate are panel regression-based analyses of the CA and real exchange rate, while the third method, external sustainability (ES), is model-free and focused on sustainability analysis. Model-based methods estimate for each country the CA norm or real exchange rate level based on a set of fundamentals and policies, and compares it with the actual to derive the implicit change in the real exchange rate that would close the gaps. The ES method assesses the sustainability of a country’s external position by comparing the CA expected to prevail in the medium-term to the CA that would stabilize the external stock position at a specified benchmark level. The 2014 balance of payments is a preliminary estimate. Page 24 fertilizers, cosmetics, and textiles) (Text Figure 14). There has recently been progress in non-price competiveness factors. Togo has reduced the time needed to start a business and to register property. It, however, lags behind other SSA fragile states and WAEMU countries in other indicators for a friendly business environment (Text Figure 15). As a result, Togo’s export share in the regional market has not improved during 2008–14 (Text Table 6). Risks to Togo’s external sustainability arise also from delays in structural reforms (e.g., of key public enterprises in energy, mining, and telecommunication) leading to lack of private sector competition, and low export and FDI growth. Text Figure 15. Togo: Doing Business Indicators, 2015 Text Figure 13. Togo: Doing Business Indicators, 2015 (1=best, 189=worst) (1 = best, 189 = worst) Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts Trading Across Borders Starting a Business Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Registering Property Paying Taxes Getting Credit Protecting Minority Investors Source: Doing Business Indicators. Togo Fragile LICs SSA WAEMU Text Table 6. Togo: Exports' market share in the WAEMU Togo exports (% of WAEMU exports) Togo exports (% of GDP) WAEMU (% of GDP, excl. intraregional trade) Source: IMF Staff estimates Staff recommendations: Pursuing a tighter fiscal stance is essential to contribute to a reduction in the current account deficit and ensure long-term external stability. Fiscal consolidation would contribute to eliminating external financing gaps and also attract additional financing, including from donors, as confidence in debt and external sustainability increases. Togo should be prudent when borrowing in non-concessional terms. Borrowing plans for investment should bear in mind medium and long-term debt sustainability. Increase the value- added component of exports. Given the low value-added component of exports and the large portion of the population employed in the agricultural sector, Togo should pursue the existing efforts to increase the productivity in the sector (e.g. PNIASA) and implement an agro-industrial development strategy. The strategy’s objective should focus on increasing productivity and gaining participation in the global value-added chain, so that living standards of a large portion of the population can be improved. Authorities’ views The authorities consider that the recent large public investments in infrastructure will foster economic development and growth. They view the large current account deficit mainly as Page 25 the by-product of the temporary increase in public and private investment. They project a more accelerated reduction in the current account than staff. They expect a faster pick-up in exports, in particular of clinker and extracting industries, and contraction of imports related to roads construction projects coming to an end. They do not think that the wider current account deficit is linked in the short term to a possible overvaluation of the real exchange rate. The authorities noted that they remain vigilant in terms of their borrowing strategy To finance from domestic sources investments in infrastructure, they are relying on the WAEMU bond market, where, in their view, there is ample appetite for Togolese bonds. The authorities agreed that improving the business climate is paramount to ensure sustainable and inclusive growth. They plan to accelerate improvements in business environment.