Togo’s fiscal policy remained expansionary in recent years. Rapid increase in domestically-financed investment has led to widening primary domestic deficits and debt accumulation (Figure 4). The planned revenue increase to offset this sharp rise in capital spending did not materialize as starting operations at the Revenue Authority (OTR) took longer than anticipated. Current spending has, as a result, been reduced to the essential, with the exception of the wage bill and oil price subsidies. On the financing side, privatization revenue shortfalls and cut- backs in donor budget support contributed to debt accumulation. Improved revenue performance is likely to partially reduce the deficit in 2015 . Monthly tax collections have been improving, particularly for domestic taxes, due to revenue administration measures put in place by the OTR. Staff expects tax revenue to rise to 16.8 percent of GDP in 2015— i.e., only a small shortfall compared to budget targets. If achieved, such collection would be a Page 13 tangible increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio compared to the average collection of around 15.6 percent during 2012-2014. The medium term budget outlook is constrained by the current expenditure policies Unresolved wage claims, due to piecemeal hiring and compensation decisions, are likely to continue to exercise pressure on the wage bill. Although the authorities intended to keep the wage bill constant in real terms, recent experience suggests that this may not be possible in the absence of a review of remuneration policies. Lower global oil prices allowed the authorities to reduce fuel subsidies. However, if the authorities do not pass through the projected higher oil prices in the medium term, fuel price subsidies will continue to burden the budget (at ¾ percentage points of GDP). In domestic capital spending, pre-financing contracts commit budgets to high levels of outlays in the short to medium term . The elevated, albeit declining, fiscal deficits, that would persist under current policies would not suffice to eliminate budget financing gaps and allow only moderate reductions in the public debt to GDP ratio and the current account deficit, and hence, would not reduce Togo’s vulnerability to shocks. 2013 Art IV DSA 2015 Art IV DSA (Percent of GDP) Text Figure 3. PV of Total Public Debt Togo has accumulated debt at a higher-than-expected pace in recent years resulting in a significant increase in debt relative to the 2013 Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA, Text Figure 3). Main sources of debt accumulation have been bond and treasury bills issued to finance the deficit, external loans of public enterprises, and external loans to finance public investments. Togo remains at a moderate risk of external public debt distress. Under the baseline scenario, all external debt sustainability indicators are expected to remain below their indicative thresholds throughout the projection period (2015–35). However, four out of the five indicators breach their threshold under alternative scenarios and stress tests, highlighting the vulnerability of the Togolese economy to various macroeconomic and financing shocks—in particular less favorable terms on new The existing oil price adjustment formula was not applied consistently over 2011-14, giving rise to subsidies. While the subsidy for gasoline and diesel has been low in 2015 due to low import prices, oil subsidies are expected to return with rising international oil prices in the medium term, unless the authorities consistently apply the adjustment formula. With pre-financing contracts, the company winning the tender for a public project receives financing equivalent to the full cost of the project upfront from a bank. The government then repays the bank, rather than the executing company. These payments are recorded as investment spending in the budget as installments are paid. As with other multi-year projects, pre-financing contracts entail executions spanning more than one budget year. Available fiscal data do not include the value of current pre-financing contracts. The projected average financing gaps of 1.2 percentage points of GDP, if covered by issuance of bonds, could result in additional interest costs of ⅓ percent of GDP by 2020. Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 14 financing and lower revenue performance. Togo’s overall public debt dynamics present heightened vulnerabilities, with the debt-to-GDP ratio remaining above the indicative benchmark for most of the projection period. Public debt management in Togo is weak. Public debt management functions are scattered between several entities, which do not share information systematically. As a result, the authorities lack a global overview of public debt and an assessment of its associated risks. The fragmentation of debt management makes it impossible to design a Medium Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) in line with good international practices. Furthermore, the authorities’ classification of public debt stock does not include some debt instruments, such as Treasury bonds and some arrears. Staff stressed the need to reset fiscal balances on a sustainable path while generating fiscal space for social spending . The risks of slipping into debt distress are now more elevated, warranting fiscal adjustment. The authorities’ desire to increase potential growth in the presence of rapid debt accumulation and current account pressures call for policies that strike the right balance. In particular, staff recommended: Anchoring public finances on a domestic primary balance that would gradually reduce the public debt-GDP ratio . In the current context, debt sustainability could be appropriately reinforced by moving to a 1.0 percent of GDP domestic primary surplus by 2020, up from a projected deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP this year (Text Table 3 and Figure 5). On the revenue side, pursuing such fiscal stance would entail accelerating reforms in revenue administration and overhauling the pervasive exemption and tax expenditure system. On the expenditure side, in the absence of a reform of the compensation system for public employees, the government should exercise a much stricter control on the number of employees than in recent past, ensuring that the wage bill declines in percent of GDP. Fuel price subsidies should be reduced by consistently applying the existing price adjustment formula. Gradually redistribute allocations towards social spending. Staff emphasized that, with large infrastructure projects mostly completed, there is an opportunity to reduce total allocation while investing more in the social sector and secondary and feeder roads. It is essential to create fiscal space to finance the new social spending initiatives proposed by the President to make growth more inclusive. Togo’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating remains weak at 3.0 for 2014, with a score of 3.2 for the economic management cluster. The World Bank’s Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) finds that, for most indicators, debt management in Togo does not meet the minimum standards of effectiveness. This would still allow wages to increase in line with inflation as well as wage drift. Full elimination of price subsidies is advisable provided it does not lead to large increases in smuggling and loss in tax base. Vulnerable segments of the population should be compensated. The current policy to subsidize kerosene, largely used by the poor, should be continued. Page 15 Text Table 3. Impact of Illustrative Fiscal Adjustment Scenario Revenues and Grants Total Revenue Tax Revenue Non-Tax Revenue Expenditures and Net Lending Wages and Salaries Transfers and Subsidies of which : Oil Price Support Public Investment Domestic Primary Balance Overall Balance, cash basis (incl. change in arrears) Financing Needs Memorandum Items Public Debt Current Account Balance (in percent of GDP) Fiscal Adjustment Fiscal Adjustment - Baseline Undertake projects that are fully integrated in all phases of the budget process . Investment contracts should (i) follow the procurement process; (ii) be fully integrated in all phases of the budget process; and (iii) require payments to the private sector after verification of completed work. Pre-financed investments make it difficult to follow these PFM standards, as the government’s payments to banks are on a fixed installment schedule, independent of the timing of the completion of the contractors’ work. Reorganize the Ministry of Finance. Essential elements of this reform would be the creation of an effective debt management unit, a strengthened budget department encompassing budget preparation, monitoring, and medium-term budget frameworks; and the establishment of a tax policy unit. The Ministry of Finance, rather than the OTR, should define tax policy. Strengthen debt management: (i) centralize all debt management functions in one entity; (ii) organize the debt management unit into Front, Middle and Back Offices; (iii) build capacity and train staff. The effect of these steps would be to stabilize and gradually reduce public debt from a peak of 58 percent of GDP in 2014 to 55 percent by 2020. This would help avoid high debt distress classification. Staff noted that Togo remains exposed to exchange rate risks since a significant part of the external debt stock is denominated in foreign currencies other than the Euro. Similarly, the increase in domestic debt, partly contracted in the WAEMU financial market and with short maturities, due to increasing use of Treasury bills, exposes the economy to rollover and refinancing risks. With a rapid rise in the stock of government securities on the regional market, Togo has the highest level of domestic debt-to-GDP ratio within the WAEMU. Page 16 Authorities’ views The authorities reiterated their commitment to prudent fiscal policies . Their main priority is to increase revenue by reducing exemptions and further enhancing tax administration. Also, a project to simplify domestic taxation is likely to result in higher tax compliance. On the expenditure side, they remain committed to applying the oil price adjustment mechanism, within the constraints posed by pricing policies in the neighboring countries and the value of the naira and the cedi. However, they noted that infrastructure gaps beyond the completed main roads will limit the scope for increasing social sector investments in the short term. The authorities view pre-financing as an innovative tool to accelerate public investment, when banks may not be willing to lend to private companies performing public works. They also note that pre-financed projects currently follow the three criteria proposed by staff, thus ensuring adherence to good PFM practices. The authorities did not perceive debt levels as posing risks to fiscal sustainability . In particular, they do not see any risks associated with the rising debt levels as long as these remain below the WAEMU convergence threshold of 70 percent of debt-to-GDP ratio. Furthermore, the authorities do not consider the levels and dynamics of domestic debt as posing any liquidity or rollover risks, given the high demand regional financial market players have so far shown for Togolese government securities. They also consider that the baseline macroeconomic assumptions underlying the DSA are too conservative, particularly those related to growth and current account developments. They, however, agreed on the need to restructure and enhance the capacity of debt management to enable it to effectively carry out its functions.