Growth has not been inclusive… g Total (years 2006 and 2011) 95% confidence bounds 95% confidence bounds Growth in mean Growth in mean Growth-Incidence Growth-incidence Growth at median Growth at median Mean growth rate Mean growth rate Text Figure 1. Togo: Growth Incidence Curve, 2006–11 Poverty reduction requires sustained high growth but also implementation of specific policies to share its benefits more broadly. Poverty in Togo is high and its human development index remains low. While the recent acceleration of economic growth resulted in a reduction of about 3 percentage point in poverty incidence to about 60 percent during 2006-2011, income distribution worsened, as real consumption in the lowest four deciles actually declined (Appendix III and Text Figure 1). Poverty has a strong geographical connotation, being highest in rural areas and the further one goes from the economically more vibrant coastal areas. In fact, poverty in rural areas increased during this period, while internal migration contributed to about a third of the total reduction in poverty. These findings suggest that policies to reduce poverty should focus on measures to enhance productivity in rural areas and market access, and targeted cash transfers. Also, given the importance of internal migration as a potential escape route from poverty, urban planning could take a more prominent role in the authorities’ poverty reduction strategy. Policies should focus on improving urban and peri-urban transportation, and the expansion of primary education and health services. Expenditure percentiles Page 15 …and faces significant bottlenecks Growth is hampered by a number of major obstacles. Chief among these are infrastructure gaps (especially energy and roads), high telecommunication costs; and—more generally—a weak business environment. While investing in roads has been a budget priority since 2010, reforms to improve energy supply and telecommunication services have hardly gone beyond early planning stages. Electricity generation costs are high, utilities inefficiently run, and Togo largely depends on energy imports, exposing it to cut off risks (see below). Survey-based structural indicators suggest that addressing infrastructure bottlenecks and improving the business climate remain crucial to unlocking Togo’s growth potential (Appendix IV). Although the financial sector has deepened in the 2000s, concentration of the banking activity in Lomé prevents a wider reach of the sector to the Togolese society, especially in rural areas (Appendix II). The new poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) aims at making growth stronger and more inclusive. The Strategy to Accelerate Growth and Promote Employment ( Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Promotion de l’Emploi—SCAPE—2013-2017 ) was adopted by the government in August 2013. It was finalized after extensive consultations with stakeholders. It builds on experience with the first PRSP (2009-11). Policies and reforms are envisaged around five strategic pillars: (i) developing sectors with high growth potential; (ii) strengthening economic infrastructure; (iii) developing human capital, social protection, and employment; (iv) strengthening governance; and (v) promoting participatory, inclusive, and durable development. The SCAPE includes plans to strengthen institutions for setting strategic priorities, and monitoring and evaluating programs. Decisive action to raise growth will be required on a number of fronts… So far, the authorities’ efforts have focused on improving road and transport infrastructure. Given Togo’s location as a regional hub, the authorities view investment in transportation infrastructure as critical to increase potential growth. A number of large projects are already advanced in transportation. In addition to large road investments, airport and port capacity will double by end-2014. The authorities have also recently established the Togo Invest Corporation (TIC)—a fully-owned state holding company with capital of CFAF 20 billion (0.9 percent of GDP) — to launch major rail and transportation projects along the North-South axis, mostly via public private partnerships. Staff cautioned the authorities that this carries the high fiscal risks typically associated to PPPs, as well as economic risks deriving from typically long gestation periods. In addition, the project carries administrative risks, as it is unclear how policy and operational responsibilities would be shared between ministries in charge of infrastructure development and TIC—thus undermining already limited ministerial capacities. Risks would be reduced if Togo could develop the institutions and legal framework to manage PPPs before the TIC starts operations. The authorities argued that in The English translation will be circulated to the Executive Board, together with the related joint staff advisory note (JSAN), as soon as possible. Page 16 the short run risks will likely be limited given that TIC’s main activities in the coming year will be to conduct technical feasibility studies. While staff agreed that transportation infrastructure should be a priority, it noted that economic growth should be supported more broadly, to include reforms in the telecommunications and energy sectors, and the business environment more generally. The cost of telecom services is among the highest in the world, and access is still limited and marred by frequent interruptions. It will be important to accelerate the implementation of the telecom strategy and to liberalize the sector by allowing more competition. A comprehensive reform of the power sector to address a major bottleneck to growth is overdue. Staff emphasized that the electricity sector is facing a structural financial deficit and that it is already constraining economic growth. Given its limited domestic generation capacity, about 85 percent of Togo’s power is imported. On current investment plans, such shortfalls will only become larger and are likely to develop into the most important constraint to growth. High input costs compared to tariffs, operational inefficiencies, over-reliance on imports, and a lack of adequate strategic planning have led to supply shortfalls. Peak demand is met by expensive fuel oil-based generation supplied by an independent power producer. The sector is accumulating arrears to suppliers, mostly to other electricity companies in neighboring countries. This exposes Togo to the risk that these countries—which are themselves facing shortages—cut exports. At the same time, the largest payment backlog toward the distribution company is due by public sector entities. The authorities concurred with the staff analysis, but pointed out that there is no short-term solution . While staff understands that this is a complex sector, it also noted that several measures could be taken in the short-term and still have a positive impact. As a priority, staff argued that it is important to break the cycle of arrears accumulation. This can be achieved via a public information campaign aiming at making the public aware of the main financial and supply constraints in the sector, with emphasis on the need to eliminate payment and service backlogs, and by a sanctions policy allowing to cut off service to public sector entities. The authorities, fearing backlash in case essential public services are interrupted, preferred to devise a repayment plan after arrears are verified. It is thus crucial that the authorities make good on their intention to settle a portion of government arrears in 2014 and that more realistic budget allocations are made. A gradual move to cost-recovery level tariffs in the medium term is unavoidable, including to attract foreign investors, provided other areas are addressed concurrently. There is significant scope for further improvement in the business climate (Appendix IV). Despite progress made in a number of areas, e.g., creation of a one-stop shop for business registration (which considerably reduced the time required to complete this procedure to 24 hours), Togo still ranks poorly in the 2013 Doing Business survey (156 th out of 185 countries). Reform efforts are especially needed in the areas where Togo is still lagging well behind comparator While the collection rate on private sector accounts is above 95 percent, collection on central government (31 percent) and municipalities (18 percent) is very poor. Overall arrears amount to 1.1 percent of GDP. Page 17 countries, such as protecting investors’ rights, enforcing contracts, and accessing financing. The authorities recently awarded a contract for the operation of a one-stop window for foreign trade. When fully operational, this is expected to facilitate the flow and transit of goods, and expedite customs and border controls. …as well as to make growth more inclusive Staff welcomed the authorities’ focus on inclusiveness under the new development strategy. However, staff noted that growth relying on capital-intensive natural resource projects is unlikely to create a lot of jobs and benefit the rest of the economy. Conversely, growth relying on higher farm productivity and broader rural job opportunities is likely to generate additional demand and to lead to faster poverty reduction. Financial sector stability and development and financial inclusion are also important elements of an inclusive growth strategy (see below). The authorities are determined to alleviate poverty via economic growth and measures to foster employment and micro-productive activities. Their strategy to promote inclusive growth hinges on measures creating opportunities for gainful self-employment, and the gradual expansion of the pilot school feeding program. Staff noted that given the strong geographical and sectoral profile of poverty, expanding conditional cash transfers and the school feeding program would appear good ways to deliver assistance to the poor. School feeding programs, in particular, have the added advantage of improving forward and backward linkages within the rural economy. However, the authorities fear that cash-based social programs may be prone to abuse and could create a culture of dependency.