The financial sector, which is competitive with a significant presence of foreign banks, faces a number of structural problems. Foreign banks account for 66 percent of the banking system assets. (Text Figure 4). Financial depth has increased significantly over the past decade but the degree of financial intermediation, measured by the loans’ term structure and their diversification across sectors, remains limited. The banks credit portfolio serves mainly some large and medium sized businesses involved in retail trade, public works, and transportation (Text Figure 5 and 6). Text Figure 4. Togo: Banking Sector Ownership Decomposition, December 2014 (In percent of system's total assets) Public Private foreign Private domestic Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. Text Figure 5. Togo: Banking System Loans Term Sturcture, December 2014 (in percent of total loans) Text Figure 6. Togo: Banking System Loans Distribution by Sector, December (in percent of total loans) long-term medium-term short-term Agriculture Mining Manufacturing Electricity and gas Public works Retail Transportation Other financial Other services Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. The elevation of the Minister of Economy and Finance to Minister of State of Economy, Finance and Development Planning, should facilitate this reform. Page 19 Since December 2013, loans to companies performing public works (mainly roads) have increased in the banking system portfolio. Large infrastructure projects have been receiving an increasing share of the banking credit, substituting for other economic activities such as manufacturing and transportation. This has been facilitated by a rapid increase in BCEAO financing (Text Figures 7 and 8) Text Figure 8. Togo: BCEAO Funding to Other Depository Institutions (In percent of total assets) Text Figure 7. Togo: Credit Decomposition by Sectors (In percent of total credit) Electricity and gas Transportation Manufacturing Public works c D a b F r a r p A y a l g A p S t c O v o N c D a b F r a r p A c D c D c D c D c D c D c D Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates.