Following the establishment of the Revenue Authority (OTR), Customs and Internal Revenue have undertaken a number of operational improvements, which resulted in good revenue performance in early 2015 . A new performance management and monitoring system is in place, which includes performance indicators at the aggregate level and performance contracts for each staff. Several important operational changes have also been put in place. Additional reforms would allow segment taxpayers more efficiently and reduce opportunities for abuse. Ceteris paribus , a depreciation of the cedi or naira versus the CFAF makes smuggling of gasoline from Ghana or Nigeria more profitable. Staff and the authorities discussed the differences between the WAEMU convergence criteria of debt-to-GDP ratio and the sustainability indicators under the LIC-DSA framework. Specifically, the 70 percent debt-to-GDP ratio criterion for WAEMU convergence is not directly comparable to the debt-to-GDP ratio used as a debt burden indicator in the LIC-DSA. The former is measured in nominal terms, while the latter is measured in present value terms. Also, apart from the debt-to-GDP ratio, assessment of debt sustainability under the LIC-DSA takes into account other debt burden indicators, a country’s specific policy and institutional environment, and its country- specific risks. Revenues have been secured by collecting more payments via banks and transferring collections within 48 hours to the Treasury account; a standardized VAT invoice is being gradually introduced; the single window is in place at the (continued) Page 17 The authorities covered considerable ground by preparing or adopting the legal acts to implement the comprehensive PFM reform plan approved in 2013 Final steps still need to be taken for the actual implementation of some key reforms. WAEMU directives have been transposed into local legislation. Procedures for the daily transfer of tax revenue to Treasury account at the BCEAO have been put in place, and a Treasury Management Committee meets weekly. Liquidity forecasts have improved but need to be more effective. Implementation of the TSA remains uncertain. Some key reforms need to be implemented to check the rising liquidity and debt risks, and to improve budget execution. Staff advised the authorities to focus on key measures to enhance fiscal governance Given political and capacity constraints, the team advised the authorities to prioritize simple but essential reforms with maximum impact. Leverage the OTR to modernize revenue administration . As a first step, the authorities should appoint the OTR’s Board of Directors. Furthermore, each exemption should be backed up by an agreement specifying the exempted goods, so that Internal Revenue and Customs can perform ex-post verification. Ideally, the exemption regime should be replaced by a tax reimbursement regime, which would mainstream ex-post verification. The current practice of requesting immediate release of imports beyond customary goods should be prohibited and all imported goods should be processed through the ASYCUDA system. The segmentation of taxpayers should be based solely on company turnover. Improve Treasury cash management and complete the establishment of the TSA. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the thrust of staff advice, and emphasized that capacity shortfalls need to be supported by technical assistance . A specific challenge in revenue administration is to find IT expertise to establish links between customs and internal revenue systems—a must to reap synergies from the establishment of the OTR. PFM reforms, including the Port; Sydonia World has replaced Sydonia++ since January; and committees to evaluate tax exemptions have been established. The reform plan spans fiscal reporting, the organization of the MEF, budget preparation and execution, cash management, and treasury single account. It also includes a module on revenue administration reform. Tax exemptions and tax expenditures are increasing and their lack of specificity is making ex-post controls difficult. The various committees on exemptions, tax expenditures on projects, and industrial zones could usefully provide recommendations on operational reforms to reduce revenue leakages. Priorities for Treasury cash management are to (i) feed the Treasury Forecast model with quality data; (ii) establish an operational process to regularly update the Treasury Plan; (iii) enact the decree committing line ministries to draft an engagement plan. Priorities for TSA are to: (i) integrate the central administration entities in the TSA and finalize the TSA at the level of the BCEAO; (ii) analyze the balance sheets of the other entities that are to join the TSA and find solutions for those which will be found in deficit; (iii) sign and implement immediately the TSA’s Cashier Agreements between the Treasury and the identified agent banks. Page 18 establishment of a TSA and the effective functioning of the Treasury cash management system, remain priorities. The State Minister of Economy, Finance and Development Planning intends to proceed with the reorganization of his ministry as soon as work for the 2016 budget is completed.