Source: BCEAO and IMF staff estimates. The recent WAEMU level consultation highlighted that Togo’s financial system is among the most vulnerable in the region. Region-wide risk assessment analyses, including a potential deterioration in credit risk or default of concentrated exposures, revealed that Togo’s banking system would be among the most affected in the region. A large state-owned bank continues to have difficulty respecting solvency ratios, constituting a fiscal risk. The provisional administrator (PA), whose term ended at end-June 2015, made considerable effort to address the financial weaknesses and governance issues. The general assembly of the bank approved a proposal by the PA to recapitalize and improve the financial situation of the bank over a year. A second bank under provisional administration since 2013 is a small private bank representing only 0.5 percent of the banking system assets. The microfinance sector has greater reach in Togo than in other WAEMU countries, but it is plagued by structural weaknesses and unregulated activity, representing a risk for depositors and potentially for the government. Inadequate supervision, under-regulated entities, and fraud threaten the sector. As of July 2015, about 100 out of 185 microfinance institutions operated without license. The sector, which suffers from governance problems, weak information systems and capacity, has experienced difficulties to adapt to the new regulatory framework and deterioration in the credit portfolio. The three microfinance institutions under provisional administration have showed little progress in their financial situation. The microfinance supervisor, CAS-IMEC, a division of the MEF, is grossly understaffed and needs significant institutional strengthening. Staff stressed the need for urgency in tackling the weaknesses evident in the financial sector, including through: Stricter enforcement of the current regulatory framework , including with regard to the relatively lax single large exposure limit to reduce credit risk. Banks not properly capitalized should be called to increase their capital to improve their ability to face shocks. Banks not WAEMU Staff Report on Common Policies of Member Countries, April 2015 (Country Report No. 15/100), IMF. Page 21 respecting the regulatory minima should take immediate remediation action or be subject to resolution. Adopting the least-cost resolution option when dealing with nonviable financial entities to limit the impact on the budget. Strengthen the supervisory body for microfinance institutions and prepare a strategy to either incorporate illegal decentralized financial institutions into the regulatory system or close them. A decision should be taken regarding the institutions under provisional administration and those facing financial difficulties, such as recapitalization or restructuring. Authorities’ views The authorities hold a more positive view of recent developments and options for the public bank facing financial difficulties. They perceive the results already achieved and the measures put in place by the provisional administration as promising and are not considering restructuring or selling the bank at its current state. The authorities agreed with the importance of addressing the weakness in the microfinance sector. The authorities noted that actions are being taken to improve the solvency of the banking and microfinance sectors, such as the March 2015 WAEMU directive that increases the minimum capital requirement from CFAF 5 billion to CFAF 10 billion in the banking sector, and from CFAF 1 billion to CFAF 3 billion in the microfinance sector.