RAISE GROWTH Growth Rate (In Percentage Points, 1995–2012) Text Figure 11. Togo: Average Contribution to Annual Growth in Togo has been weak and highly volatile (see SIP). Most of Togo’s growth over the last decades is attributable to labor accumulation, while human capital accumulation remained low and total factor productivity negative (Text Figure 11). This emphasizes the importance of improving the efficiency of factors of production mix in the economic system. An important element of the government’s strategy to facilitate growth has been to improve transport networks. The authorities intend to continue pursuing an ambitious investment plan, including in social infrastructure. The efficiency of investment projects can be improved as Togo’s Source: Penn World Table. Adjusted labor Adjusted TFP Capital stock Education Real GDP Page 22 performance at all stages of the investment cycle lags behind WAEMU countries and fragile LICs (Text Figures 12 and 13). Text Figure 12. Togo: Public Investment Management Index, 2011 Text Figure 13. WAEMU: Public Investment Management Index, 2011 Togo WAEMU Fragile-LICs Appraisal Selection Implementation Evaluation Overall Appraisal Selection Implementation Evaluation Overall Benin Burkina Faso Mali Côte d'Ivoire Togo Source: Dabla-Norris et al. (2011) . Staff noted that increasing public investment may not be sufficient to unlock growth Complementary policies are needed to achieve higher growth and sustainable debt. These include improving the quality of public investment, crowding-in private investment, widening economic space for small and medium enterprises and FDI, and boosting exports. Source: Dabla-Norris et al. (2011). Staff advised the authorities to look beyond physical investment to foster growth. Main recommendations included: Invest in investing. Improvements in public investment management can significantly enhance its quality and economic growth. Open to more private sector competition key sectors with highest government presence and intervention—mining, telecom, energy . Strong government presence may stifle innovation, depress productivity, and raise costs. Arrears to utility companies should be settled after verification. Further improve the business environment. The specific Doing Business Indicators on which Togo performs poorly (e.g., paying taxes, getting credit, land tenure) should be targeted for improvement with a monitorable and highly publicized action plan. Dabla-Norris E., J. Brumby, A. Kyobe, Z. Mills, and C. Papageorgiou (2011) “Investing in Public Investment: An Index of Public Investment Efficiency,” IMF Working Paper, 37. One option discussed with the authorities is to diagnose priority areas of intervention in the investment cycle by volunteering participation in the new Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA) tool. For example, Telecom services in Togo are among the most expensive in the world and their quality is low. The power sector is inefficiently run and saddled by cross-arrears with all levels of government. Power cuts are increasingly common. Page 23 Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the thrust of staff advice and felt that more infrastructure could be delivered by the public sector via public-private partnerships . In particular, the authorities are aware that Togo’s chronic lack of energy is stifling growth and long-term solutions are needed to increase domestic generation. In the medium term, the Adjarala dam project is expected to provide more than half of Togo’s electricity imports. On mining, a new mining code under finalization should lay the foundation for more development and foreign participation in the sector.