Under unchanged policies, output growth is expected to be sustained in the medium term, although current account and debt pressures are unlikely to abate, and the global environment has deteriorated (Figure 3). Growth is expected to average 5½ percent in 2015–18, supported by agricultural production, transportation services linked to international trade, and the impact of investments in transport infrastructure, which should facilitate private economic activity. The current account deficit is projected to improve marginally to 12¼ percent of GDP in 2015 as a result of lower oil prices and narrow only to 9½ percent of GDP by 2020 with the gradual decline in the fiscal deficit and increased savings of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Inflation is expected to remain subdued in line with WAEMU trend, with commodity price decline more than compensating for U.S. dollar appreciation. The risks to baseline forecasts are largely home-grown, although a sharp slowdown in regional or global growth would inevitably have an impact (Annex II). Limited fiscal consolidation would lead to further accumulation of public debt, and inaction in PFM would result in less efficient spending and debt management. Delays in opening to private sector competition key sectors, such as mining, energy, telecommunications, and in improving the business environment would dampen medium-term growth prospects. A protracted slowdown in advanced and emerging markets would affect Africa as a whole and in turn Togo, mainly through the impact on key trading partners, such as Ghana and Nigeria. The impact would be moderate given Togo’s relatively diversified country and product base for exports. Given Togo’s isolation from global financial markets, the main channel of transmission of global shocks would be through imported food and oil inflation, or through the price of Togo’s commodity exports. Further deterioration in the terms of trade would dampen growth. Political risks hinge on the government’s capacity to deliver its promises of economic growth, social spending, and job creation. The authorities’ task is complicated by mounting SOEs (e.g. Port of Lomé, airport) have just concluded large investments to expand capacity. Thus, they are expected to increase their revenue and savings. This will improve the private sector saving investment balance, as SOEs are classified within the private sector. In the absence of more developed financial markets, BCEAO’s monetary policy has a weak impact on inflation in the WAEMU (WAEMU Staff Report on Common Policies of Member Countries, April 2015, Country Report No. 15/100, IMF). Page 12 population pressures, with large numbers of people expected to join the labor force. Such pressure may generate an increasing level of social and political discontent. On the other hand, as the next elections are not due until 2018, the government has the ideal window of opportunity to make good on their promises of economic growth and social improvements. Authorities’ views The Togolese authorities largely agreed with staff on the outlook and challenges but are more optimistic about medium-term growth prospects and the current account deficit. The authorities consider that economic growth will be above six percent over the medium-term as the recent investments in infrastructure have laid the foundation for more private sector participation in economic activity. In their view, agriculture will also continue to be an engine of growth, benefiting from the government’s productivity enhancing programs. The authorities think that the increase in the current account deficit is a temporary phenomenon. As these large investments are soon to be completed, they expect the current account deficit to narrow faster than in the staff’s projections. The authorities perceive a persistent appreciation of the U.S. dollar as the biggest risk because of its impact on debt service and the price of imports, particularly capital and intermediary imports for infrastructure projects. In terms of risks to financial stability, the authorities consider the microfinance sector as most vulnerable to adverse shocks. In their view, the resistance of interest groups to reforms is unlikely to have an impact on growth, as ongoing improvements in the business environment should promote economic activity. Finally, the authorities believe that the risk of social unrest is minimal, as proven by the peaceful 2015 presidential election.