Recent developments. Economic growth is estimated to have recovered to around 2 percent in 2013/14, following a sharp contraction in 2012/13 induced by the completion of a large capital project. Inflation has remained subdued in recent years, ranging between 0 to 3 percent per Fiscal years in Tonga run from July to June. The reconstruction of the business district in the capital city was completed in 2011/12. Page 6 annum, mainly reflecting low global food prices and, more recently, dramatically weaker global oil prices. This is significantly lower than the current CPI inflation reference range of 6 to 8 percent set by the National Reserve Bank of Tonga (NRBT) in 2011 (Figure 2). The external position has been strengthened, owing largely to increased grant inflows, which have raised international reserves to around 6½ months of prospective imports, well in excess of the NRBT’s target range of 3–4 months of imports (Figure 3). Real GDP Growth - Decomposition (In percent) Outlook. Growth is expected to accelerate in the coming years owing to several temporary factors (text chart). Reconstruction works in the aftermath of Cyclone Ian in 2014 are being undertaken, while the mid-2015 coronation is expected to boost tourism. The economy is projected to expand in 2015/16, supported by buoyant construction activity on the back of public works spending for the 2019 South Pacific Games (the Pacific Games). Meanwhile, inflation is expected to increase gradually to around 3.5 percent, reflecting stronger demand generated by the Pacific Games and stable global commodity prices. Sources: IMF staff estimates Cyclone effect Games effect Other Growth rate Risks. The overall balance of risks is tilted to the downside (Appendix I). On external risks, spillovers from a protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies could weigh on Tonga, mainly due to its close ties with Australia and New Zealand through aid, remittances, trade and tourism. On the upside, Tonga would benefit as a net commodity importer if oil and food prices remain low for an extended period of time (Box 1). On domestic risks, slippages in delivering on policy reforms could affect the level of development partners’ budget support, leading to lower aid inflows. Any potential cost overruns relating to the Pacific Games could make it necessary to mobilize additional resources. Natural disasters similar to recent cyclones could also take a toll on the economy (with average annual damage of around 4 percent of GDP—see Figure 1—indicating the level of risk). Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with the overall economic assessment, while stating that they expected higher growth over the medium term. They considered that the expected investment in a major hotel, the government’s reform efforts, and private sector development accompanied by accelerated credit growth would provide more impetus to economic activity. They forecast that near-term inflation could be temporarily negative, depending on energy price developments and offsetting effects from higher domestic food prices. On external risks, they agreed that spillovers could be expected through the remittance and trade channels, and are of the view that remittances will probably rise, albeit at a weaker growth rate of remittances, reflecting the favorable growth outlook of the U.S. Page 7 TONGA Box 1. Tonga: The Macroeconomic Impact of Lower Oil Prices 1/ As a net oil importer, Tonga is expected to benefit from the recent decline in oil prices in the short term, with a favorable impact on growth, inflation, the trade balance and the fiscal balance. As a second round effect, remittances could also be positively affected as key host countries for expatriate Tongans are also net oil importers. However, if the price drops are sustained, prospective investment in renewable energies could be discouraged Growth. Lower fuel prices would stimulate domestic demand via a rise in private disposable income and corporate profitability. This would boost several activities, especially in the service sectors (e.g., distribution, transport), which could prop up the near-term growth rates. Inflation. The lower import price of oil will ease inflationary pressures, mainly through driving down domestic costs of transportation. Electricity prices are also adjusted in line with the change in the import price of oil. This price effect would dominate the impact of higher domestic demand on inflation. The CPI inflation rate is expected to fall by 0.3 percentage point in 2014/15 and 0.2 in Trade. Fuel imports account for almost 30 percent of total imports in Tonga. The value of fuel imports should fall since the effect of lower import costs should exceed the impact of possible increases in fuel demand. The lower fuel costs could also lower transportation costs deemed to be a significant portion of costs of imports, given the remoteness of Tonga. As a result, the current account is expected to improve in the near term. Fiscal. Revenues from import tariffs and VAT would be reduced through lower imports, while higher domestic demand may increase tax revenue. On the spending side, the authorities could save some fuel-related expenditure on the margin, while there is no fuel subsidy in Tonga. Overall, the fiscal balance could improve slightly by 0.1 percentage points both in 2014/15 and 2015/16. Remittances. Key source countries for the remittances to Tonga are net oil importers including the U.S. and New Zealand. A boost to activity in these countries would favorably affect the inflow of remittances to Tonga, and thus help stimulate domestic demand. Investment in mineral exploration and renewable energies. A prolonged period of low energy prices, however, could discourage future investment in deep-water mining as well as renewable energies. __________ Prepared by Yasuhisa Ojima (APD). Page 8