Tonga’s fiscal position has improved, supported by large grant inflows, but spending pressures will remain high in the near term. The overall balance improved to a surplus of around 1 percent of GDP in 2013/14, partly due to grant inflows, but is expected to revert to a deficit in 2014/15. Spending pressures in the near-term include: i) cyclone-related reconstruction work; ii) wage pressures from the civil servants association; and iii) preparations for the 2019 South Pacific Games. Most of the reconstruction work, which contributes to the ramp up in capital expenditure in 2014/15, has so far been met by strong grant inflows mainly from World Bank and Asian Development Bank, but strong projected tax revenue performance in 2014/15 is also expected to play a funding role (text table). Table. Tonga: Summary of Government Operations, 2012/13-2015/16 Budget Proj. (In percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Total revenue Of which: tax revenue Grants Total expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Of which: wages and salaries Capital expenditure Overall balance (incl. grants) Primary balance (incl. grants) Primary balance (excl. grants) Sources: Tongan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 2013/14 2014/15 2014/15 2015/16 Medium-term fiscal challenges center on maintaining prudent debt management and implementing public financial management reforms. Tonga’s public debt currently stands at around 50 percent of GDP, and given its vulnerability to external shocks, it is important to maintain a prudent debt policy. The staff welcomes the government’s conservative borrowing policy (that is, no external commercial borrowing and only limited concessional borrowing) and the agreement with China EXIM Bank to defer repayment of principal on previous loans for a period of five years. As a result, the mission’s debt sustainability analysis indicates that Tonga remains at moderate risk of debt distress. The authorities’ plan to finance the Pacific Games using non-debt creating funds (for example, the Pacific Games revenue, franchises, and donations) is fiscally prudent. Cost overruns could, however, necessitate borrowing, which could jeopardize fiscal sustainability. Tonga introduced a three-year budget framework in 2013 and adopted a roadmap for public financial management reform in 2014, but has not yet set a clear fiscal target for the medium-term. Page 9 TONGA Taxes on Income, Profits, and Capital Gains Taxes on Property Domestic Taxes on Goods and Services Taxes on International Trade and Transactions Other taxes Sources: Tongan authorities; and IMF staff estiamtes Tonga: Tax Revenue (In percent of GDP) Against this backdrop, it is imperative to build sound fiscal positions to bolster resilience to shocks. A key fiscal policy recommendation is to gradually increase the primary fiscal surplus to about 1 percent of GDP over the medium-term, so that external debt stabilizes at about 35–40 percent of GDP (to provide a buffer to relative to debt distress thresholds, to allow the country to safely absorb external shocks) . Since grant disbursements can fluctuate from one year to the next, staff also recommends monitoring the primary balance excluding grants as a key performance indicator. Measures to create such a primary surplus include: i) improving tax administration on consumption tax (for example, reducing the number of zero ratings and exemptions, undertaking a regular review of tax incentives); ii) restraining the wage bill in line with the authorities’ target (e.g., continuation of hire freeze, more efficient staffing); and iii) improving the quality and efficiency of spending through ongoing public financial management reforms (Appendix II). The Fund stands ready to provide technical assistance to support these fiscal reforms through the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center (PFTAC). Finalizing the debt management strategy, with technical assistance by the World Bank is also critical to lay a solid foundation for prudent debt management. The spending program for the Pacific Games needs to be carefully managed. Staff recommend that the authorities enhance controls on the spending program for the Pacific Games, and caution that the current proposal by the South Pacific Games Committee to raise funds by imposing a levy on foreign exchange transactions could give rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval. Staff have requested further information from the authorities regarding the proposed levy in order to assess its jurisdictional implications. Another proposal to raise funds by imposing an additional departure tax should be carefully studied, in order to determine how much of an adverse effect such a tax would have on tourist arrivals. Against this backdrop, staff also stresses the importance of maintaining a prudent fiscal stance and building sound fiscal positions to bolster resilience to shocks. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s views including the need for a medium- term fiscal anchor. They noted that the adoption of a roadmap for public financial management reform and the Debt Management Strategy could form the basis for a medium-term fiscal framework. The authorities aim to further broaden the tax base and strengthen administration, and plan to undertake an expenditure review of all government programs to improve the quality of public spending. They also concurred with the need to restrain the public sector wage bill, and noted that they would like to review technical issues (e.g., coverage of wages) before establishing an explicit monitoring benchmark. They also highlighted that more efficient inter-ministerial staff allocations would be helpful in this regard. The authorities are aware of the potential cost overruns of the Pacific Games. They plan to control cost, for instance, by utilizing existing facilities for the Pacific Games (e.g., using school as Page 10 accommodation facilities). The authorities confirmed their prudent stance of not using debt-creating flows to finance the Pacific Games, and that they would consult with the Fund on the possible introduction of foreign exchange levy and increasing the departure tax for overseas travel.