Setting. Tonga is a small agriculture-based open economy in the South Pacific with a narrow production base and low connectivity, resulting in high transportation costs, limited economies of scale, and low diversification (Figure 1). Tonga’s high dependence on remittances, foreign aid and imported energy poses challenges as it increases the economy’s sensitivity to exogenous shocks. Other exogenous vulnerabilities stem from natural disasters (e.g., severe cyclones affected Tonga in 1982, 1991 and 2014). Population vs GDP-Weighted Distance 1/ ) k ( h g w P G Tonga Fiji Vanuatu Tuvalu Samoa Solomon Islands PNG Kiribati Micronesia Palau Marshall Islands Caribbean countries Source: Gibson. 1/ Average distance kilometers to all other countries of the world, as weighted by GDP. Log (population) Tonga: Key components of GDP (In percent of GDP) Agriculture Manufacturing Construction Public Administration Sources: Tongan authorities; and IMF staff estimates Political developments. The second general election for the Legislative Assembly was held in November, 2014. A new prime minister was elected in December and took office in January 2015. The previous finance minister and the central bank governor remain in office. King Tupou VI’s official coronation is scheduled for July 2015, following his accession to the throne in March 2012. Traction. The authorities have made progress on key policy advice outlined in the last Article IV consultation. In the 2014 staff report, staff emphasized the importance of preserving a prudent fiscal policy stance and continuing to expedite financial sector reform. The authorities have continued to apply the No New Loan policy (no external borrowing) while amending it to allow for concessional budget support provided by development partners. They adopted the Public Financial Management Reform Roadmap in 2014. The authorities also strengthened risk-based supervision, including through PFTAC technical assistance. They are also expected to enact the Receivership bill this year, although progress in business-friendly legal issues (e.g., a bankruptcy law) remains partial.