Raising potential growth remains a key challenge. Tonga’s per capita GNP growth over the past two decades was favorable when compared with other non-resource rich Pacific Islands peers, lifting Tonga to the ranks of middle-income countries. Tonga also compares favorably with other PICs in terms of living standards (e.g., high life expectancy at birth) and its business climate. Nevertheless, private sector activity and FDI remain relatively small. In the absence of reform measures over the medium term, longer-term growth would revert to its historical average of around 1¾ percent, once cyclone reconstruction work and Pacific Games- related activities are complete. There are several government initiatives to raise Tonga’s growth potential. Tonga’s Strategic Development Framework (TSDF), which is currently under the revision to TSDF II, aims to further develop the primary sector (agriculture, forestry and fishery) and tourism as key sources of growth. The Tonga Energy Road Map 2010-2020 aims to reduce Tonga’s vulnerability to oil price shocks and to improve the cost-effectiveness of energy use. Nonetheless, these efforts have yet to bear fruit. For instance, the initiative of the authorities to commercialize the Tonga Development Bank (TDB) and to revive the International Dateline Hotel has been challenging reflecting a shallow pool of investors. Key bottlenecks for private sector development include risks and investor uncertainty (for example, ambiguity in law and regulations), relatively high business costs (e.g., high electricity tariffs (chart)), and limited access to external markets (Appendix V). Industry Electricity Tariffs (In U.S. dollars per kWh; 2011-2013) Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. APD small states Other small states Mean other small states Mean APD small states V h g v b B h B G V P g j F z B L b K h B Business-enabling structural reforms to promote private sector development remain crucial. Promoting private sector development through further improvements in the business climate, together with more business-friendly laws and regulations (for example, revising the Foreign Investment Act, introducing new legislation on receivership bankruptcy) is critical. As in most small states, the contribution of the public sector to the economy will remain relatively large in Tonga. Therefore, enhancing public financial management with an appropriate medium-term fiscal framework would improve growth potential. Prioritizing expenditure toward growth enhancing and social spending categories (health, education, and infrastructure) would also promote greater inclusiveness. Page 16 Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that structural reforms are critical to raise growth potential. They noted that the revamped Tongan Strategic Development Framework has identified strategies for lifting potential growth rate to around 3 percent in the next 10 years. The authorities continued to see growth potential in the agricultural and tourism sector, and also indicated that new activities, such as call centers could be promising. The authorities expect to make significant progress in revising the Foreign Direct Investment Act and enacting the Receivership Bill to create more transparent business transactions later this year. They also intend to continue their efforts to make SOEs more efficient, including via commercialization of Tonga Development Bank (TDB).