Tangible progress has been made in repairing banks’ balance sheets and strengthening the legal framework, but challenges to financial stability remain. At present the financial system is bank-centered, comprising one government-owned bank (the Tonga Development Bank) and four commercial banks, one of which has only recently been established. Non-bank financial institutions (for example, provident funds, credit unions, microfinance institutions) are relatively small, and have been expanding only gradually. Key issues include: Improvements in banks’ capital and credit quality. Asset quality in the banking system was deteriorated (e.g., higher non-performing loans (NPL)) during the global financial crisis, but most of Tonga’s banks subsequently improved their capital positions. While NPL ratios have declined to less than 13 percent in 2013/14 down from around 20 percent in 2008/09 (Table 6), the level remains high. Excess reserves. Excess reserves have been large in recent years, hovering around 25 percent of total bank assets. The increase in international reserves and limited sterilization has led to a large injection of liquidity to the banking system. Legal framework . Efforts have rightly focused PICs: Excess Reserves (In percent of total assets) Tonga Samoa Fiji Solomon Islands on strengthening regulations including amending the National Reserve Bank of Tonga Act and the Financial Institutions Act with technical assistance from the Fund. The thrust of updating these two laws lies in the authorities’ initiative to: i) bring all financial institutions in Tonga under the supervision of the NRBT; ii) strengthen the autonomy and accountability of the NRBT and reform its governance framework in line with best practices; and iii) provide the NRBT with the authority to issue binding regulations and entrust the NRBT with clear enforcement actions for any contraventions of its decisions. Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estiamtes Page 14 Banks’ excess reserves mirror weak private credit growth. Despite the authorities’ efforts to stimulate lending through accommodative monetary policies, credit growth has been sluggish due to constraints from both the supply and demand side (e.g., limited collateral, lack of investment opportunities) (Appendix IV). The authorities have embarked on different initiatives to support credit growth, through, for instance, an on-lending scheme administered by Tonga Development Bank designed to channel funds at favorable terms to selected sectors of the economy (e.g., agriculture, manufacturing). It is important that the authorities carefully examine the effectiveness of this on- lending scheme before scaling up its size. In addition, the establishment of Tonga Business Enterprise Center (TBEC) to assist private businesses with the development of business plans and loan applications is a welcome development. Financial risks can be mitigated through active liquidity management, the introduction of macro-prudential tools, and improved bank supervision. Managing macro-financial risks . Current high levels of excess liquidity do not pose an immediate risk to financial sector stability, but better tools to manage liquidity are needed to help avoid excessive credit growth in the future. Possible measures to absorb excess reserves include selling treasury bills and raising reserve requirements. Macro-prudential measures (e.g., loan-to-value ratios) could also play a role in safeguarding financial stability. Improving banking supervision. Enhanced monitoring of banks’ asset quality (e.g., through risk- based on-site inspection to make sure that loan loss provisions are adequate) is important to ensure financial stability. This work could be strengthened in coordination with the PFTAC advisor on banking supervision. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need to absorb excess liquidity to help manage macro- financial risks. They recognized the importance of structural reforms to create an environment conducive to more investment opportunities. They were also mindful that higher statutory reserve deposit (SRD) requirements might increase lending rates and/or fees and charges, and reduce credit supply to the private sector, particularly small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs). Therefore, they plan to learn from other Pacific countries’ experiences (e.g., Fiji and Samoa) as to how to stimulate lending to the private sector especially for SMEs. The effectiveness of the government’s Managed Funds (e.g., Economic Growth Facility in the Tonga Development Bank) in stimulating credit growth will be assessed in conjunction with any other measures that may be introduced. The NRBT agreed to use macro-prudential tools to manage macro-financial risks, and noted that they will continue to closely monitor credit growth and examine its impact on monetary policy targets and financial stability. The authorities committed to further strengthen banking supervision. This activity is currently assisted by the IMF PFTAC expert. They indicated that the supervision of non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) (e.g., retirement fund, credit union, micro-credit institution) is a new challenge, and requested continued technical assistance support to help develop the legislative and regulatory framework for NBFIs. Page 15 TONGA