Tonga has adopted an informal inflation reference range. Pursuing an inflation range in the context of a fixed exchange rate regime is challenging, although limited capital flows and the wide bands around the exchange rate target give the NRBT some room for maneuver. A weak transmission mechanism of monetary policy, the current accommodative monetary conditions, and Tonga’s sensitivity to external price shocks also complicate the task of controlling inflation. In fact, inflation has consistently been below the reference range (currently at 6 to 8 percent), raising questions about the usefulness of the band. The authorities should consider replacing the current inflation reference range with a lower reference rate. Setting it in line with Tonga’s medium term inflation forecast (e.g., using the IMF staff’s forecast of 3.5 percent) would help better clarify what would informally guide monetary policy. The new reference rate would need to be clearly communicated to the public, but should be reviewed periodically to ensure consistency with economic fundamentals (Appendix III). Page 11 TONGA Box 2. Tonga: Assessing Reserve Adequacy 1/ Tonga’s international reserves have grown rapidly since the global financial crisis, mainly due to grants and remittance inflows. In 2013/14 reserve holdings peaked at US$153 million. This corresponds to more than 7 months of goods and service imports and is well in excess of the NRBT’s lower bound of 3 to 4 months of import cover (Figure 1). Tonga’s reserve position also exceeds levels recommended by standard “rules of thumb” such as coverage of 3 months of imports of goods and services, 100 percent of short-term debt and 20 percent of broad money in the economy (Table 1). The standard IMF formula for assessing reserve adequacy (IMF, 2011) yields minimum adequate reserves for Tonga of US$61 million or 14 percent of GDP, less than half of the NRBT’s actual reserve holdings in 2012/13. A comparison between actual reserves and benchmark metrics thus raises the question of whether reserve holdings in Tonga might be excessive. A cost-benefit analysis developed by Dabla- Norris et al. (2011) allows for the determination of optimal levels of reserves specifically for low income countries. This framework maximizes the net benefit of holding international reserves by balancing the cost of reserves and the benefits of precautionary reserve holdings as insurance against adverse external shocks. Calibrating the model for Tonga yields optimal levels of reserves in the range of 5 to 10 months of import cover depending on assumptions about the cost of holding reserves (Figure 2). The opportunity cost of holding reserves can be approximated by the difference between real returns on short-term foreign currency assets and alternative domestic investments. For Tonga, the interest differential for government bonds and 3-month U.S. government treasury bills could be a proxy for the cost of holding reserves. The differential of roughly 3 percent implies optimal reserve holdings equivalent to 6 to 7 months of imports coverage. Overall, reserve holdings are adequate in light of the large benefits of absorbing frequent external shocks and the low cost of holding reserves for Tonga. __________ Prepared by Eva Christiane Kneer (APD). The standard IMF metric is based on a weighted average of short term external debt (STD), longer term debt arising from portfolio investment and other investment liabilities (OL), broad money (M2), and exports of goods and services (EX). Dabla-Norris, E. et al., 2011. Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis. IMF Working Paper 11/249. Page 12 Box 3. Tonga: Exchange Rate and Competitiveness 1/ Tonga’s real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. Other indicators suggest that the economy remains competitive. Exchange rate Tonga’s real effective exchange rate (REER) is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. The purchasing power parity approach suggests an undervaluation by around 6 percent, while the equilibrium real exchange rate approach indicates an overvaluation by 15 percent. Other indicators Reserves. Gross international reserves are adequate and rising, and reached a level of 7 months of prospective imports in 2013/14. Exports. Exports recovered quickly from a temporary slump during the global financial crisis, and have grown moderately in recent years. In the medium term, exports are projected to grow at an annual rate of 9 percent. Number of tourists. The number of tourists has increased steadily as Tonga is becoming a more attractive tourist destination. Costs of doing business. Tonga remains competitive compared with other PICs, according to Vanuatu Samoa Solomon Islands Registering Property Protecting Investors Papua New Guinea Tonga: Doing Business, 2015 (Rank out of 189 economies) 1/ Ease of Doing Business, 2015 (Rank out of 189 economies ) 1/ the World Bank’s Doing Business 2015 report. Relative strengths include access to credit, contract enforcements and the low administrative burden involved in paying taxes and starting a business. There is room for improvement in terms of protecting investors and registering property. Source: World Bank Doing Business (2015 Doing Business Report). 1/ Higher rank indicates more costly. These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Dealing with Construction Permits Trading Across Borders Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts Kiribati Fiji Tonga Palau Micronesia Getting Credit Getting Electricity Paying Taxes Starting a Business Marshall Islands Prepared by Shi Piao and Eva Christiane Kneer (all APD). Page 13 TONGA Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with staff’s views on the need to revisit the inflation reference range. They indicated that the range should be lowered and replaced by a rate, however, they would need to analyze the appropriate level over the medium term, partly because Tonga is a price taker and its inflation is susceptible to external shocks. They also noted that a lower reference rate would necessitate frequent revisions of the reference rate, should inflation rebound in the future due to an unexpected external shock. They emphasized the difficulty of having monetary policy influence the inflation rate, which is why the NRBT is not targeting inflation. The authorities expressed their interest in further developing their monetary policy framework and operational tools, with technical assistance from the Fund.