Real growth is projected at near 2½ percent in 2014, as energy sector growth recovers following the maintenance outages of recent years. Non-energy growth should remain buoyant due to the high level of support from public expenditure. Over the medium term, reduced slack in the labor market may become a binding constraint. Non-energy growth should settle in around long-term potential estimated at 2 to 2½ percent per annum. Absent a wide-ranging program of reforms, structural impediments will continue to hamper non-energy investment, and hence long-run potential output in that sector. Real medium-term energy sector growth potential is estimated around 1 percent per annum. Beyond the medium term, a recent pickup in energy sector investment may bear significant fruit, especially if deepwater exploration proves as productive as hoped Foreign direct investment in the energy sector reached a historical high of $2.3 billion in 2012, and capital expenditure in the sector is expected to be around $3.3 billion in 2014. Core inflation should remain relatively low, although demand-side pressures will have to be monitored carefully as the output gap closes. On unchanged policies, projected fiscal deficits would grow to 5.5 percent of GDP by given falling energy prices in the WEO baseline. This assumes no fiscal adjustment since specific, quantified adjustment measures have not been announced. However, the authorities’ have set a balanced budget target for 2016, and a range of measures is under discussion that could provide considerable scope for consolidation. See Box 1 on “Underemployment in Trinidad and Tobago” in Trinidad and Tobago: Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation, IMF, October 2013. The government has provided a range of fiscal incentives to the energy sector in recent years, including accelerated capital allowances, that energy company executives credit with the recent pickup in investment in the sector. In addition to the stimulus for new investment from such incentives, new technologies, such as Ocean Bottom Cable (which greatly improves results from seismic surveys), also hold out hope for increased production from previously developed provinces and improves prospects for Trinidad and Tobago’s unexplored deepwater fields. The split of profits across the natural-gas value chain among upstream gas production, the National Gas Company, which aggregates and distributes natural gas, and the downstream users of natural gas is expected to be an important factor in determining the scale of investment in the industry. The government is currently drawing up a Natural Gas Master Plan that will play a critical role in determining, among other things, pricing along the gas value chain. Page 10 Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (Baseline Scenario) (In percent of GDP, unless specified otherwise) Est. Projections Real GDP growth (in percent) Non-energy 1/ Inflation (end of period) Revenue 2/ Expenditure Current Capital expenditures and net lending Overall fiscal balance Overall fiscal non-energy balance External current account balance Central government debt 3/ Public sector debt 3/ Net of HSF deposits 4/ Gross official reserves (US$ millions) In months of imports Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Statistics Office; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Includes VAT and Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured (FISIM). 2/ Fiscal data is central government unless otherwise specified and refers to the fiscal year ending in September. 3/ Excluding debt issued for sterilization. 4/ Starting in 2013, assumes no additional contributions to the HSF. Even under the conservative baseline, a debt sustainability analysis indicates no major concerns through the projection period (Annex 2). Although the central government’s debt trajectory is of some concern, the debt ratio’s low initial level allows it to remain below 40 percent of GDP. Moreover, external debt remains at less than 20 percent of GDP by the end of the projection period, while the share of short-term debt is exceptionally low. Thus, rollover risks are limited and debt metrics are relatively insensitive to changes in risk parameters. The main external risk over the medium term would be a sustained decline in energy prices (Annex 3). Prices for Trinidad and Tobago’s liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports have held up well as it shifts its exports from the United States to Asia, Europe and Latin America. Technological changes along with the development of a significant LNG export capacity from the United States could pose a long-term threat if it significantly expanded global natural gas supplies. However, local producers are confident that demand for natural gas will continue to outstrip supply. There are significant elements of conservatism in the medium-term projections. price projections already embody market expectations about the impact of the shale revolution. Moreover, staff projections are based on equally weighted (low) U.S. and (high) Asian gas prices, even though Trinidadian natural gas is no longer sold to the United States. Estimated energy reserves, based on past energy audits, appear conservative given the recent pick up in investor interest in the sector. The global energy market for natural gas remains significantly fragmented, with benchmark prices in the U.S. averaging around $4 in 2013, while prices in Japan averaged around $17 in 2013. Page 11 The potential for spillovers from instability within the Caribbean is uncertain . Trade links are limited, but there are significant gaps in knowledge about financial links. The Caribbean Regional Financial Project will shed light on these links, with results expected in late 2014. Domestic risks are likely to the upside . The baseline, which is based on current policies, assumes neither fiscal consolidation nor significant structural reform. While the electoral cycle suggests prospects for either are limited in the coming year, the authorities have set broad goals to achieve both over the medium-term, Once implemented, policy reforms could serve as near-term headwinds, but would also put the country on a more sustainable trajectory, help restore private sector confidence and enhance competiveness and potential growth in the non-energy sector. On the downside, failure to address an actuarial gap in the public pension system in the long term would pose an increasing contingent fiscal burden.