The economy is expected to shrink for a third year in 2016 given structural impediments, now abetted by cyclical headwinds. Energy output will decline as natural gas, and especially oil fields continue to be depleted, while the petrochemical sector has suffered plant closures and gas shortages that constrain output. However, new gas fields should boost energy production in 2017-2018. Non-energy growth is projected to decline in 2016 on spillovers from job losses in the energy sector as well as the fiscal consolidation. These factors would continue to weigh on activity until non-energy growth fully rebounds in 2018. Inflation should remain subdued on weak activity. In staff’s baseline projections, with unchanged fiscal policies and current energy price forecasts, the current account remains in deficit through the medium-term. Although exports recover gradually, in line with energy prices and the new gas production, they remain well below 2014 levels, even by 2021. Slow implementation of supply side structural reforms and the overvalued currency limit the potential for export diversification and growth. Import growth moderates in line with an expected decline in FDI. The drawdown of the HSF and increased official financing are insufficient to address the country’s financing requirement and the overall external position steadily deteriorates to 3.3 months of imports by 2021. Under the baseline, the fiscal deficit rises to a range of 12½ to 13½ percent of GDP over the medium term, resulting in an unsustainable debt buildup . The central government debt to GDP ratio rises to nearly 80 percent of GDP by 2021, while the broader nonfinancial public sector (NFPS) debt ratio rises to almost 100 percent. The Debt Sustainability Analysis’ (DSA) “Heat Map” flashes red regarding the level of debt and gross financing needs, both in the baseline and under various shocks, although this is mitigated by authorities’ strong policy commitment to enhancing revenues and reducing and rationalizing public expenditures (Annex II). That said, the authorities’ ambitious target for revenue collection based on improvements to revenue administration may Given the magnitude of the needed fiscal adjustment, staff’s projections took explicit account of negative multiplier effects, assuming a 3-year impact with a maximum and cumulative impact of 0.3 and 0.6, respectively. Page 14 Est. In months of imports Net of HSF deposits 4/ Projections Non-energy Non-energy 1/ Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (Baseline Scenario) prove difficult to achieve, although there does appear to be ample scope for gains in this area. In addition, the state-owned Petroleum Co. of Trinidad & Tobago (Petrotrin), which Moody’s downgraded from Ba1 to Ba3 in April 2016, could represent a contingent liability to the government. Real GDP growth (in percent) Inflation (end of period) Revenue 2/ Expenditure Current Capital expenditures and net lending Overall fiscal balance Overall fiscal non-energy balance Primary balance External current account balance Central government debt 3/ Public sector debt 3/ Gross official reserves (US$ millions) Risks to growth are tilted to the downside and much will depend on the authorities’ ability to navigate the transition to the lower energy price environment (Annex III). Given still ample bank liquidity, monetary tightening’s impact on the non-energy economy will likely be subdued, but may have a lagged effect. Absent sufficient exchange rate flexibility, renewed US dollar appreciation against the currencies of Trinidad and Tobago’s trading partners would inhibit export diversification, while failing to address FX shortages would restrain economic activity as businesses are unable to make critical imports or pay suppliers in a timely manner. More worryingly, the expected erosion in the reserves position, while already significant in staff’s baseline, could be exacerbated if currency speculation or precautionary demand for U.S. dollars pick up, both of which are much more likely should FX shortfalls persist. In the longer run, future energy investment will depend not only on future expected energy prices, but on whether the investment regime is seen to be appropriate to the new environment. Most critically, the government must demonstrate that its medium-term strategy safeguards fiscal sustainability in order to maintain consumer and business confidence. “De-risking”, as in other Caribbean countries, is becoming an area of concern for the Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Statistics Office; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Includes VAT and Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured (FISIM). 2/ Fiscal data is central government unless otherwise specified and refers to the fiscal year ending in September. 3/ Excluding debt issued for sterilization. 4/ Starting in 2013, assumes no additional contributions to the HSF. Moody’s estimated that support to state-owned enterprises could increase central government debt by 2 to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2016, the latter in the unlikely event that the government would need to guarantee all of Petrotrin’s financing needs. Page 15 authorities, particularly for institutions with perceived high risk profiles, including private members clubs and money remitters, though less so for the large commercial banks.