Trinidad and Tobago is embarking on sustained growth after several years of weak performance, attributable to the global crisis and energy sector supply-side slowdowns Growth estimated at 1.6 percent for 2013 was buoyed by 2.5 percent growth in the non-energy sector. Although data limitations inhibit analysis, government subsidies and transfers appear to be supporting consumption while public development spending supported construction. change in methodology that eliminated a significant upward bias to food price inflation as of April 2013. Core inflation has remained within a narrow range of 2 to 3 percent. Recorded unemployment dropped to a record low of 3.7 percent in QI-2013, the latest data available, although a substantial amount of underemployment still goes unreported. The external position remains healthy given strong external buffers and a structural current account surplus . External reserves grew from $9.2 billion at end-2012 to US$9.8 billion in February 2014, helped by December’s $550 million external bond issue. The Heritage and Stabilization Fund (HSF) grew to $5.1 billion (September 2013), due to contributions and earnings. The estimated current account surplus rebounded to 11.8 percent of GDP in 2013. Conclusions must be tempered by serious data deficiencies, but there are signs that excess bank liquidity may be leaking into imports, especially automobiles. There is also a widespread view that portfolio outflows are starting to respond to interest rate differentials that have moved marginally in favor of U.S. dollar-denominated assets. Although the external stability assessment indicates a large degree of overvaluation using official inflation data, there is a severe bias in measured inflation (Annex 1). Estimates calculated using the official CPI indicate exchange rate overvaluation of 8.1 to 25.6 percent in 2013. However, adjusting for the measurement bias in inflation reduces that to 2.6 to 8.5 percent. Other indicators, such as the stability of Trinidad and Tobago’s global share of non-energy exports, suggest that competitiveness may not yet be a critical problem. However, as energy resources dwindle, the country will need to rebalance exports towards the non-energy sector. The foreign exchange market has become a focus of concern once again . The Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago (CBTT) administratively determines both the price of U.S. dollars (within a narrow range) and the marginal volume via its own sales (Box 1). The CBTT has historically Official trade data from the Statistical Agency are available only up to February 2012. Data for the rest of 2012 and 2013 are the CBTT’s estimates using trading partner data (although the CSO has also recently provided some unaudited trade data). In addition, the capital and financial account has incomplete coverage and lacks detail on external assets and liabilities, resulting in a large and unexplained private capital account, equivalent to 10 percent of GDP in 2011. The CBTT is enhancing its BOP compilation system to meet international standards. The CBTT’s plan has been to fully transition from BPM5 to BPM6 by 2014, and subscribe to SDDS. However, progress has been very slow, in significant part due to the challenges at the CSO, and significant delays are likely. According to the CBTT, sales of new automobile increased by 16 percent in 2013, while those of motor vehicles and parts are estimated to have grown 35 percent in 2013, Q1, yoy. Page 6 responded to excess foreign exchange demand by adjusting sales quantities in subsequent auctions until the market clears, including a sale of $200 million into the market in late May, 2014. However, market participants have reported fairly widespread and persistent foreign exchange shortages since the fourth quarter of 2013 . The persistence of the shortages, in contrast to previous episodes, may suggest growing balance of payments pressures stemming from high domestic liquidity, rather than merely a temporary mis-calibration of short-term shifts in supply and demand. Banks reportedly favor providing foreign exchange for current transactions, but there is no data on the types of transactions for which shortages have arisen, or on the length of delays. Several business associations have expressed concerns about foreign exchange shortages and the impacts on their members. Some have complained that their members are unable to pay foreign suppliers, risking adverse impact on their credit standing vis-à-vis foreign suppliers. In addition, repeated shortages have resulted in incentives to hoard foreign exchange. The CBTT reports that its most recent injection of $200 million was sufficient to clear unsatisfied demand queues for foreign exchange, although it acknowledges the market could return to a position of excess demand. Fiscal policy was relatively expansionary in FY 2012/13 (October 2012–September 2013). The central government deficit was estimated at 3.5 percent of GDP. The outturn was lower than the budget target of 4.6 percent as revenue outperformance exceeded expenditure overruns (the latter incurred partly due to payment of previous multi-year wage settlements), but the degree of over-performance fell compared to recent history. Subsidies and transfers grew further . Energy subsidies rose by 1.6 percentage points of GDP, which did not, however, prevent energy arrears from growing further. Unlike previous years, capital expenditures exceeded the budget, in part due to a reallocation of resources from underperforming projects to other areas of the public sector investment program. Social programs remain overlapping and poorly coordinated . The government is moving forward with reforms to better target vulnerable households and develop a central registry for some programs, to provide better client-service and to monitor and detect fraud. Debt remains moderate. Gross central government and nonfinancial public sector debt ratios declined, to 16.0 and 30.7 percent of GDP, respectively (September 2013). Central government external debt was only 6.2 percent of GDP at end-FY 2013, while HSF assets totaled 18.5 percent of GDP at end-September 2013. The authorities intend to significantly outperform the FY 2013/14 deficit target. This is being accomplished by ad hoc measures, including larger than budgeted dividend from state-owned enterprises and by reining in current expenditures, notwithstanding election pressures. In addition, Fuel subsidy arrears to the state-owned energy company Petrotrin were estimated at 3.0 percent of GDP by the end of FY 2012/13. Additional cash has been appropriated for petroleum subsidies in FY 2013/14 (totaling some 3¾ percent of GDP), both to finance ongoing subsidies and reducing arrears, which are expected to be eliminated by the fiscal year’s end. Dividends from nonfinancial SOEs, excluding the National Lotteries, already totaled 1¾ percent of GDP in the first quarter of FY 2013/14, compared to 0.8 percent of GDP budgeted for the whole fiscal year. This includes a dividend from the National Gas Company equivalent to ¾ percent of GDP. Page 7 the development budget is likely to be under-executed as in prior years. Overall, staff project the FY 2013/14 deficit at 1½ percent of GDP. Absent these factors, the deficit would be closer to 3½ percent of GDP, suggesting the underlying structure of fiscal policies remains accommodative. The authorities are making significant efforts to reduce arrears. Energy subsidy arrears are being eliminated by netting them off against tax arrears from the state-owned energy company Petrotrin. Budget allocations for VAT refunds have been increased to TT$500–600 million per month in order to reduce arrears on refunds to TT$ 1 billion by end-FY 2013/14. The intention is to clear them in FY 2014/15 and then change the system so only net VAT proceeds are remitted in future. Fiscal revenues over-performed in FY 2012/13, and are set to do so this year too. Direct tax revenues are on track due to robust economic activity and improvements in tax administration. Yields from indirect taxation were mixed as higher customs duties were more than offset by lower net VAT yields, the latter reflecting in part the partial clearing of refund arrears. On revenue policies, the authorities have begun the initial steps to eventually implement a property tax, to be phased in over three years. The authorities also intend to reform the VAT, but preparatory work has not yet significantly begun. The National Insurance System (NIS) continues to run surpluses. While benefit expenditures exceeded contributions for the first time in FY 2012/13, earlier than projected, portfolio returns financed a continued accumulation in reserves. In line with the 8 th actuarial review’s recommendations, benefits were increased in 2013–14 by some 50 percent to compensate for inflation since the previous review, while revenues were boosted by raising the maximum level of income subject to contributions (which also raises future benefits), and by increasing the contribution rate. However, further actuarial reforms will be needed to make the system solvent over the long term (Box 2). Monetary policy remains accommodative. The CBTT has maintained its repo rate at a cyclical low of 2.75 percent, mostly in view of contained core inflation. Credit growth overall has been fairly moderate, increasingly concentrated in consumer loans and mortgages as business lending contracts (-3.6 percent yoy through end-December). Weak business credit reflects largely a lack of demand, given considerable spare capacity in certain sectors, large cash balances held by businesses, and a lack of confidence in a strong economic recovery. Private Credit Growth, Banks and NBFIs (percent change, y-o-y) Total private credit Mortgage loans Business loans Consumer loans Revenues have over-performed in recent years, especially reflecting conservative energy price assumptions when projecting energy-sector revenues. The NIS’s accumulated assets totaled TT$ 24.6 billion (13¾ percent of the staff’s estimated GDP) in June 2013. Although the NIS is not a part of the general government, the government has a contingent legal liability to meet benefit obligations. The system is administered by the National Insurance Board of Trinidad and Tobago (NIBTT), which comprises representatives of government, employers and labor. Page 8 The banking system appears sound . After-tax profits have recovered from cyclical lows while system-wide NPL ratios have fallen 1.2 percentage points and capital is one-quarter of risk- weighted assets. Systemic liquidity, stemming from foreign exchange generated by the energy sector and domestic liquidity injections from fiscal operations, remains high, rising to TT$ 7.5 billion at end-March 2014, compared to an annual average of TT$3.6 billion in 2012. The CBTT continues to absorb excess liquidity Treasury bonds totaling TT$ 1.56 billion were issued in mid-2013 and commercial bank deposits with the CBTT were rolled over. After limits on Treasury borrowing for liquidity sterilization were reached, they were increased in December Nonetheless, excess liquidity continues to challenge the abilities of the CBTT to absorb it. Financial sector reform is advancing (Box 3). Securities legislation, passed at the end of 2012, has enhanced the powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the CBTT and SEC are collaborating on developing a new regulatory model for non-bank systemically important financial institutions. Legislation to modernize insurance regulation, including introducing risk-based regulatory capital, is anticipated for the summer of 2014, while laws on pension reform and bringing credit unions into the central bank’s regulatory perimeter are still in the pipeline. The authorities have also taken steps to improve crisis prevention and planning, including at the regional level. The wind-up of CL Financial Corporation (which owned CLICO, a failed insurance company) continues . A large majority of holders of government bonds issued after the collapse took up the offer to exchange their bonds for shares in the CLICO Investment Fund, which had been owned by CL Financial. Meanwhile, the government plans to recoup much of its remaining exposure to CLICO by selling its traditional insurance operations, and has retained a consultant to value those assets. The government has advanced on structural reforms, notably to improve rankings on global competitiveness indices . The government has reduced the average time to start a business from 43 days to 3 and to obtain construction permits from 42 weeks to 6. It is also reducing the time to clear shipments through customs and intends to establish appropriate insolvency frameworks, reform procurement legislation, expedite property registration and improve contract enforcement. Elsewhere, structural reform progress is lagging . There has been little to no progress in improving public service efficiency (Box 4). Many officials express frustration at the slow pace of hiring, promotions and disciplinary actions. Personnel decisions are cumbersome, requiring actions from three public agencies, subject to excessive judicial challenges, and excessively centralized. In addition, government bodies, including special purpose vehicles, have proliferated. Despite the low recorded unemployment rate, there is evidence of significant underemployment. The estimated elasticity of employment to GDP is low, suggesting that official The Central Bank’s primary tools for liquidity absorption are open market operations through the issuance of treasury bills, notes and bonds on behalf of the government and special fixed-term deposits with commercial banks. The proceeds of the treasury sales are kept at the CBTT rather than being made available for Government spending. The limits on Treasury bills were increased from TT$ 15 billion to TT$ 30 billion, and on Treasury notes from TT$ 5 billion to TT$ 15 billion. Page 9 data may underestimate the degree of slack in the labor market. Temporary make work programs reduce measured unemployment, but contribute little value added. Finally, and critically, there has been little concrete progress in improving the statistical base . The Central Statistical Office (CSO) has yet to move into suitable quarters and remains woefully under-staffed and under-resourced. The production of critical data (including GDP, trade, and labor, as well as tourism statistics) continues to fall further behind, grinding to a halt in critical areas and rendering the conduct of surveillance ever harder (Box 5).