High-quality fiscal consolidation Tunisia: Relief Measures Introduced After the Sousse Attack (In percent of GDP) To support Small and Medium Enterprises Economic activity stimulus in regions Loan Rescheduling Credit line to finance regional enterprises Exceptional guarantees for investment loans and regional enterprises Enterprise creation program Government’s share of capital increase in S&M Enterprise Bank Fiscal consolidation has been delayed to 2016, following a modest loosening of the 2015 fiscal stance to support short-term growth. The revised 2015 budget law approved in August 2015 includes a package of urgent measures (amounting to about 0.5 percent of GDP, see text table) to help alleviate the short-term economic fallout linked to the Sousse attack and an increase in security spending (0.2 percent of GDP). Staff welcomed the countercyclical response to the attack, but warned that some measures—such as the VAT rate reduction to the hospitality sector—should be temporary. The revised budget also includes an increase in the public sector wage bill (equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP) arising from recent agreements in the education sector and a 5 percent generalized salary increase. These higher expenditures were accompanied by a significant under- execution of capital spending (0.7 percent of GDP) and net savings from lower oil prices (1.6 percent of GDP decline in energy subsidies), which helped limit the structural fiscal deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2015 (lower than programmed, but up from 3.3 percent of GDP in 2014). The authorities noted that the 2015 deficit would have been lower than in 2014 in the absence of the record (and unplanned) decline in public investment in 2014. They underlined their efforts at containing fiscal imbalances as the revised budget includes a 20 percent across the board cut in non-essential goods and services (MEFP ¶9). To Social Sectors (youth, women, children programs), Culture and Education Total Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. To the Tourism Sector Reduction of VAT from 12 to 6 percent Elimination of Tourist exit Fee Payment of Contributions to Social Security System Guarantee mechanism for hotel loans Page 24 Tunisia: Selected Fiscal Indicators, 2014–20 (In percent of GDP) Prog. Prel. Prog. Est. Proj. Revenue of which: Tax revenue Expenditure and net lending of which: Wages and salaries Transfers and subsidies Capital expenditure Net lending of which: Public Banks' recap. + AMC operat.costs Central government deficit (-) (excl. grants) Structural fiscal balance General government debt Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. (In percent of GDP) Wages and salaries Energy subsidies Key Spending Components Expenditure on goods and services Capital Expenditure The deteriorating composition of public spending needs to be reversed. Staff regretted that the net savings from lower fuel subsidies have been somewhat offset by a growing wage bill (Box 5). It stressed that controlling spending today is important to avoid a vicious cycle in which current spending increases are financed by cuts in capital spending, which in turn reduce future growth and revenues. The authorities noted that the fragile social and economic situation required action on wages to reduce social tensions, create a climate conducive to reforms, and act as a countercyclical policy that will boost demand. They agreed with staff on the need to contain the wage bill in the medium term (Section B). Staff urged the quick implementation of the tax reform package (see Section B), which would have helped compensate for the increasing wage bill through new permanent revenue measures. The authorities argued that the 2015 revised budget’s main focus was to update key aggregates in view of the weaker economic outlook and introduce “emergency relief” measures in response to the Sousse attack. It stressed that a major tax policy reform would require more discussions, which can only be held in the context of the 2016 budget. Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. proj. prel. Page 25 Box 5. Tunisia: Public Sector Employment and Wages Compensation of Employees, 2014 As a share of general government taxes As a share of GDP (RHS) As a share of public expenditure (RHS) Public sector employment has increased sharply in the aftermath of the January 2011 revolution. Between 2010 and 2014, as a result of high unemployment and security needs, public sector employment rose by 20 percent to 615,000 workers. Of that increase, 40 percent was for security and defense personnel. The rest was mostly the regularization of contractual personnel—primarily in low skilled categories—that were made permanent. Total public employment—which includes a 30 percent increase in public enterprise workers over the last three years to about 180,000—is today at 795,000, corresponding to a ratio of total public employment to total employed workforce of about 24 percent—a level that is three times higher than in Morocco or emerging markets such as Chile or Mexico. Public sector recruitment pushed the wage bill to record high, despite the government’s earlier efforts to freeze wage increases and limit promotions. The wage bill increased from 10.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 12.7 percent in 2014 and will increase to around 13.3 percent in 2015, a level higher than most comparator countries. This post-revolution increase reversed efforts to reduce the wage bill from 12.2 percent of GDP in 2002 to 10.4 percent in 2008. Currently, the wage bill absorbs 56 percent of tax revenues and amounts to close to 50 percent of total expenditures, ratios well above those of most countries in the world (text chart). Pressures from labor unions to increase public sector wages stem from the perception that they lost ground since the revolution. However, this perception is not reflected in the data. Cumulative inflation was about 18 percent over 2012–14 whereas the average public sector salary increased by 14 percent and wages in the private sector increased by 6-12 percent. Wages of medium and lower public sector categories rose by 23 percent (the 6 percent increase in the minimum wage in 2013 had no impact on the public sector, as salaries for lower categories of civil servants are almost double the minimum wage). In addition, wages in the public sector are significantly higher than in the private sector, with public sector workers enjoying a 23 percent wage premium over private workers, especially for better-educated new labor market entrants. Comprehensive civil service reform is urgent. The public sector salary system is a result of structural weaknesses, and not a new phenomenon. Past reform attempts—dating as far back as 1989—called for ending the proliferation of allowances, replacing the current index system with a base salary scale, raising recruitment standards, and strengthening the connection between performance and promotion. The functions and staffing levels of the public sector also need to be addressed. The success of any civil service reform will require strong ownership by the government and key stakeholders. Source: World Economic Outlook. Page 26 (In percent of GDP) Debt and Amortization Staff and the authorities agreed that fiscal consolidation is necessary to reduce external imbalances, restore private sector confidence, and decrease financing constraints. A 3 percentage point adjustment in the structural fiscal deficit over the medium term—starting in 2016—will reduce public debt to 53.4 percent of GDP, from a peak of 57.4 percent in 2018, albeit substantial downside risks persist—especially with regards to a depreciating currency or permanent decline in growth (Annex II). The authorities also noted that large amortization payments due in 2017 (see text chart) require a sustained effort to reduce the fiscal deficits. They agreed that, civil service reform, energy subsidy reform, and revenue mobilization should be the main elements of the consolidation strategy, which should preserve public investment (see Section B). Amortization: Domestic (RHS) Amortization: Foreign (RHS) Gross debt 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Source: Tunisian authorities. Tunisia: Yields of Main Revenue and Expenditure Measures Over the Medium Term (In percent of GDP) Tax Revenue Direct taxation Increase tax on dividends from 5 to 10% Strengthen presumptive tax regime for liberal professions Increase collection of property tax Indirect taxation VAT: General reform: Harmonize tax rates to two levels (6% and 18%), reduce exemptions Exempted goods: Reduce list of exempted goods (0 rate) from 20 to 10 key items while liberalizing prices gradually Liberal professions: increase VAT from 12% to 18% Excises: Increase rates for alcoholic beverages while liberalizing retail prices Customs duties: Eliminate Preferential treatment regime (tax at current rates) while rationalizing customs duties Reduction of Earmarked Special Funds Expenditure Savings Wage bill : Revision of salary benefits and indemnities and improving career incentives Enhance cost effectiveness of Goods and Services Energy subsidies (net impact of increasing electricity tariffs and adjusting oil product prices to international prices) Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. 1/ There are around 40,000 liberal professions but only 30,000 pay (corresponding to 60% of presumptive tax regime). 2/ Apply 18 % to all goods and services currently taxed at 12 %, and apply 6 % for agricultural and food products, except for fresh products. 3/ Harmonize taxation of all type and origin of beers. 4/ Around 1/3 of non energy imports benefit from this system Page 27 Monetary Policy—Containing inflation and improving the transmission channels Interest Rates Monetary policy will continue to aim at containing inflation. Staff and the authorities agreed that the policy rate remains at an appropriate level in view of moderate headline and core inflation, slow credit growth, and economic activity well below potential. Staff welcomed the strengthening of the policy rate as an effective signaling tool through the recent convergence of the money market and policy rates, as well as the return of the real interest rates to positive levels (0.5 percent), which is necessary in view of low domestic savings. It also welcomed the authorities’ readiness to tighten monetary policy, should inflationary pressures arise as a result of public wage increases or if depreciation pressures materialize (MEFP ¶13). Source: Tunisian authorities. Lending rate Money market rate Deposit rate Reference rate Sep-13 Mar-14 Sep-12 Mar-13 Sep-14 Mar-15 Sep-15 Banks’ continued dependence on CBT refinancing is a structural weakness that needs to be addressed and carefully monitored. The banking sector has been facing structural liquidity needs since the beginning of the revolution, with recent improvements negated by fresh deposit withdrawals from mining companies and increased FX interventions. As a result, banks have remained overly reliant on direct CBT refinancing. When completed, the ongoing recapitalization of public banks—which have been the main recipient of CBT resources—will help reduce refinancing needs and mitigate the structural liquidity deficit. The establishment of a full-fledged lender of last resort mechanism (November 2015 SB) which is expected to be introduced in the forthcoming CBT law will improve the resilience of the financial system and improve the conduct of monetary policy. Liquidity management will also be helped by ongoing improvements in the collateral framework, as the share of borrowings collateralized by government securities doubles from 20 percent in 2013 to 40 percent in 2014 (end-December 2014 SB). This will also minimize risks to the CBT’s balance sheet. Staff welcomed plans to improve the monetary policy framework . Improvements in liquidity forecasts and deeper interbank markets—including through the establishment of a more mature repo market and a yield curve—are needed to strengthen the monetary policy framework and facilitate the medium-term move toward inflation targeting. Staff encouraged the authorities to speed up adoption of the CBT law, which will help reinforce CBT credibility through new institutional arrangements granting greater CBT independence and clarity of objectives—an important pre- requisite to successful inflation targeting. Staff stressed the importance of moving ahead with removing the existing “caps” on the lending rate, which hampers the monetary policy transmission channel. The authorities noted that consultations on that front, including with banks, are ongoing. Page 28 Toward more flexible exchange rates Share of CBT Sales in the Foreign Exchange Market The depreciation of the dinar over the last two years was halted in the first half of . An appreciating dollar vis-à-vis the Euro and pressures on the dinar in May and June led to an increase in FX sales—double the previous monthly average—which contributed to the exchange rate appreciating by 5 percent vis-à-vis the US dollar and the Euro during the first six months of 2015 (MEFP ¶18). Staff noted that the exchange rate continues to remain within a narrow margin of 2 percent relative to the statistically identified trend, confirming the “de facto” crawl-like behavior of the exchange rate (Annex I). Sep-13 Source: Tunisian authorities. Jan-13 May-13 Jan-14 May-14 Sep-14 Jan-15 May-15 Tunisian Dinar to Euro-US$ Basket Exchange Rate 2% band (Index, higher values = depreciation) Greater exchange rate flexibility would help reduce external imbalances and rebuild reserves. The authorities explained that their interventions in the FX market are not intended to manage or maintain a certain level of the exchange rate, but rather to smooth excessively large fluctuations that largely arise from lumpy FX demand from energy operators. The authorities consider that greater exchange rate flexibility is necessary to contain the current account deficit, rebuild buffers—as reserves are still below the Fund’s ARA metric—and bring the dinar in line with fundamentals (text chart). To that end, they plan to limit their interventions in the FX market (MEFP¶18). Both staff and the authorities agree that the dinar is currently 5–15 percent overvalued (Annex I), although the authorities did not feel that the overvaluation represents a major drag on firms’ competitiveness. To further rebuild buffers, staff urged the authorities to purchase FX during periods of excess supply. Source: IMF staff calculations. Weights based on currency of trade transactions. Exchange Rates (Jan. 2008 = 100; +: appreciation) REER Euro per dinar NEER Aug-09 Aug-13 Sources: Tunisian authorities; INS; and IMF staff estimates. Aug-10 Aug-11 Aug-12 ARA Metric Decomposition (In billions of U.S. dollars) Exports M3 Short-term debt Other (excluding FDI) Reserves Aug-14 Aug-15 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 proj. Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 29 A deeper market would facilitate a more flexible foreign exchange rate policy. Staff commends the authorities’ plans—approved by the CBT’s Board of Directors in May 2015—to deepen the foreign exchange market and provide the necessary liquidity for economic operators (MEFP ¶19), including through relaxing conditions governing exchange rate and interest rate hedging instruments. Staff regrets the delay in implementing weekly foreign exchange auctions, which is now scheduled for end-October 2015 (SB), but understands that reforms to deepen the market will facilitate its implementation. Over the medium term, a gradual shift to full capital account convertibility is needed. A comprehensive reform of foreign exchange regulations—including current rules constraining the use of FX deposits or caps on foreign investment in bonds and stocks—could attract significant foreign capital flows and increase growth potential. The authorities agreed that more progress in entrenching macroeconomic stability and developing domestic financial institutions and upgrading their prudential supervision is needed before moving toward capital account convertibility. They also noted that the peculiarity of Tunisia’s economy also calls for an in-depth study of capital flows linked to the off-shore sector.