Tunisia’s old state-centered development model has shown its limits . Over the past two decades, state intervention has distorted product markets and held back the emergence of a dynamic private sector. The pre-revolution focus on an industrial policy based on selective incentives led to wide regional disparities and a predominance of low value-added activities that failed to create good jobs (Box 6). A broad home-grown reform agenda—focused on fiscal reforms, the financial sector, and the business environment—is needed to kick start growth and make it more inclusive (see Annexes IV and V for a discussion of inclusiveness issues and taxation fairness). The key role of fiscal reforms Fiscal consolidation needs to be accompanied by growth-enhancing structural fiscal reforms. Staff supports the authorities’ tax reform strategy aimed at promoting greater equity, simplification, and revenue mobilization. Following two years of consensus building and technical work that culminated in national tax consultations in November 2014, a new and ambitious tax reform strategy has been prepared by the Ministry of Finance, with support from Fund TA. It appropriately focuses on: (i) addressing the complexity of the indirect tax system by simplifying the VAT from three to two rates (6 and 18 percent); reducing exemptions, limiting excises to a selected list of products; rationalizing customs duties from seven to three levels (0, 20 and 36 percent, the latter for agricultural products); (ii) improving fairness, including through broadening the tax base, a gradual convergence of the on-shore and off-shore corporate tax rates, improving the progressivity of personal taxation, and simplifying the taxation for small enterprises; and (iii) reducing earmarked taxes. Tax reform—which will be implemented in 2016—is expected to help increase tax revenue by 1.5 percentage points of GDP over the medium term—with the magnitude of the increase, including in the first year, depending on how aggressive the tax package is in broadening the tax base. Page 30 Box 6. Tunisia: Inclusiveness and Growth Constraints Intellectual property Corruption (The Lower the score, the worse) Peers Average Property Rights Legal dispute framework efficiency Minority shareholders protection Global Competitiveness Indicators, 2015 Lack of effective institutions to ensure Lack of finance. Access to credit has been cited by business entrepreneurs as the main obstacle to The January 2011 revolution highlighted that growth benefits have not been evenly shared. Tunisia’s old growth model—based on selective state intervention—led to unequal access to opportunities and job creation largely limited to low value-added industries. Regional disparities were very large: (i) average poverty rates remained 3 times as high in the interior of the country than in richer coastal “offshore” areas; (ii) at 25 percent, unemployment rates in the interior regions were double those of coastal areas; and (iii) only 13 percent of foreign firms were created in the interior regions. A growth diagnostic approach applied to Tunisia highlights the following structural issues—mostly a legacy of past policies—as the most binding: doing business over the past decade, while off shore and mining firms—the most successful in Tunisia— are generally not credit constrained. Local firms try to compensate for lack of credit access through self- financing. Lack of access to credit is driven by weak credit information, high perceived default risk, connected lending and lack of adequate bankruptcy laws, which are exacerbated by banks’ structural liquidity problems. public sector accountability. Tunisia performs poorly on corruption, property protection, and judicial independence where it is below comparable peers. Regulatory barriers and anti-competitive practices limit growth, particularly through requirements for ministerial approval, prohibition of investment in certain sectors, and tolerance for abuse of market position. Wide-scale tax evasion, inefficient tax administration, and growing informality are also cited as causes of unfair competition. Taxation. Overall, taxation in Tunisia compares relatively well with similar countries, but relies on a very narrow tax base, because of tax incentives for offshore firms, VAT exemptions, and unequal treatment between wage and capital income. Corporate taxation and sales tax levels are in line with international norms, but high payroll and social security contributions represent a high burden for domestic firms. Labor market. The 2014-15 Global Competitiveness Survey ranks Tunisia poorly on labor market efficiency, where it stands 129 out of 144 countries, driven by the low participation of women (134), rigid wage determination (119), lack of labor-employer cooperation (118), and rigid firing and hiring practices (97). Interestingly, infrastructure was not seen as a binding constraint to growth. Tunisia’s geography is an asset for growth, reflecting its direct access to the sea and its proximity to the European market. In spite of regional disparities in basic infrastructure, Tunisia’s existing infrastructure appears to be an area of strength. Work force availability was also found to be appropriate, with Tunisian firms ranking work force education as only the 10th most problematic issue for doing business in 2014. Yet, improving the higher education curricula could help reduce the existing skill mismatches. Source: World Economic Forum: “The Global Competitiveness Report, 2014-15.” Regulations Judicial independence Page 31 A successful tax reform requires an improved tax administration. The authorities confirmed their commitment to a three-year tax administration modernization program—aimed at establishing an integrated tax administration with improved systems and processes. They stressed their preference for a gradual approach by first improving compliance in the small business sector before expanding the process to large and medium-sized enterprises. The authorities argued that the creation of a category of “new tax collectors”(end-July SB), which would have helped provide collection powers solely to the tax agency, would take more time as they first want to proceed with moving existing functions in the same location but under current management structures. Staff urged the authorities to accelerate the process toward unifying tax administration functions, starting with improving the processes at the large taxpayer unit (80 percent of tax collection). (In percent of international prices, assuming Brent price = $51.68) 1/ Staff and the authorities agreed that lower oil prices provide an important opportunity to depoliticize fuel prices and reduce energy subsidies in a sustainable manner. The 56 percent decrease in international oil prices since the beginning of 2014 has not yet translated in decreases in domestic retail fuel prices, which are, for some products, 30-50 percent above international levels (text chart), thus providing additional savings to the budget. More sustained subsidy reform would require: Energy Prices 2015 price International price LPG Diesel Gasoline Kerosene High Fuel Oil A proper automatic fuel price formula. Staff Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Spot price on 8/31/2015. urged the quick revision of the existing asymmetric automatic fuel price adjustment formula— which is currently triggered only if there is a cumulative $6 a barrel increase within a quarter— into an automatic symmetric formula that will smooth large fluctuations in international prices and ensure full cost recovery and appropriate tax collection. The authorities agreed with this approach, but argued that such a revision would take time and can only be implemented in 2016. A well-designed communications campaign would also be needed to explain the formula and its use should global prices pick up again. Adjustments in electricity tariffs . Staff regrets the suspension of programmed increases in electricity tariffs, which are still heavily subsidized—20 percent below cost recovery even after last year’s efforts to adjust tariffs for medium and low voltage industries and eliminate subsidies for cement companies. Staff urged further increases in electricity tariffs towards cost-recovery levels to continue reducing untargeted and regressive energy subsidies. The authorities argued that gains in overall energy subsidies from lower international oil prices do not justify increasing tariffs at this juncture. Containing the wage bill is essential to make space for priority spending. Staff is encouraged by the authorities’ determination to implement a comprehensive civil service reform, which will help reduce the wage bill to 11 percent of GDP over the medium term (MEFP ¶32). It urged the authorities to move quickly in designing an overall and comprehensive civil service reform Page 32 strategy that will review the organizational structure, revise salary benefits and indemnities, and strengthen career incentives. Public financial management reforms are needed to strengthen budget execution, notably on investment projects (MEFP ¶10). Earlier steps to decentralize project execution and the adoption of the procurement code last year have not yet succeeded in accelerating capital spending, particularly in the first half of the year, where the budget execution rate was close to 30 percent. Better project selection and prioritization, closer coordination between central and regional administration, and better resolution of land rights—including through the implementation of newly issued decrees allowing expropriation when needed—are expected to contribute to accelerating the implementation of investment projects. Staff welcomed progress made in finalizing the new organic budget law—designed with TA assistance from the EU—which will be submitted to parliament in November. This law, along with the progress made in performance budgeting (MEFP ¶38)—will improve budget preparation, introduce medium-term budgeting, increase transparency, and streamline existing control procedures. Strengthening management and control of public enterprises is necessary to reduce contingent liabilities and fiscal risks. The recent completion of a comprehensive assessment of auditing and internal control mechanisms of public enterprises (SOE) will serve as a basis for formulating a new public enterprise monitoring strategy (October 2015 SB), including through regrouping the various control bodies. Monitoring would also be improved by new performance contracts for the five largest SOEs (end-October 2015 SB), which should include indicators that cover financial performance. Staff urged the authorities to conduct a full assessment of fiscal risks arising from the operations of public enterprises, including from the issuance of new guarantees. The authorities stressed that over the last three years the outstanding stock of government guarantees has remained below 10 percent of GDP, and that a clear action plan to reduce fiscal risks will be established following forthcoming Fund TA on the topic. A sound and efficient financial system New Benchmark for Financial Deepening Restoring a sound banking system is a prerequisite for achieving higher and more inclusive growth. The old model, based on weak underwriting standards and widespread “connected lending,” accompanied by weak regulation and supervisory forbearance fell short on financial intermediation, keeping private sector credit well below potential (text chart). A modern banking system, subject to strong supervision and competition, would improve credit allocation—removing a key constraint to economic growth. Sources: Fayad, D., P. Garcia Martinez, A. Mati, "Financial deepening in the Maghreb" (forthcoming) 1/ The benchmark is calculated assuming that financial sector development depends on structural characteristics of a country, such as GDP per capita, and population and demographic factors. 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 (In percent of GDP) Private sector credit Financial sector benchmark 1/ Page 33 Addressing vulnerabilities of public banks is a key priority of the authorities’ reform agenda. Tunisia’s three public banks (Box 7) have been hampered by weak lending practices and governance issues. Exposure to a tourism sector that has been severely affected by the impact of the January 2011 Revolution and, more recently, by the terrorist attacks that directly targeted the sector—is an additional factor. Progress on reforming public banks is under way albeit with some delay: Recapitalization is underway consistent with international practices (MEFP ¶23). The legislative authority to use the recapitalization funds allocated in the 2014 budget was granted by parliament in August 2015. The restructuring plans of the three banks (two of which were adopted in February and June) and the launch of the capital subscription process will allow one public bank (BH) to meet the 10 percent minimum solvency ratio by end-September. The recapitalization of the STB—14 percent of assets and currently insolvent— is expected to be completed in October at the end of the capital subscription process. Depending on the finalization of the audit results, which are still pending, the third public bank (BNA) might not need additional capital thanks to explicit state guarantees for SOE loans and planned asset sales. For all public banks, and in line with sound international practices, the government remains committed to cover any unsubscribed capital at the closing of the books, effectively diluting existing shareholders. Staff stressed that lower provisioning needs, justified in bank audits by the existence of sovereign guarantees for loans to SOEs, require the explicit commitment to renew those guarantees. Business plans underpinning the recapitalization of public banks will need to be updated to ensure regulatory compliance throughout the restructuring period (2015-19). Existing business plans (adopted prior to the Sousse attack) have become unrealistic as a result of a significant drop in tourism and weaker economic activity. Preliminary stress test findings point to a capital shortfall arising within a year (of about TD 50 to 100 million) under staff’s baseline scenario (and no recovery of the tourism loan portfolio). The authorities agreed that updated plans should be approved by the Boards of the banks before the end of the year (MEFP ¶21). They fully expect that capital shortfalls could be met by banks’ sales of non-strategic assets. Staff agreed this could be an acceptable strategy provided that sales are on an arms-length basis and not to banks’ subsidiaries. Operational restructuring (MEFP ¶23). Staff welcomed the designation of new Board members in all three public banks, and urged continued progress on this front through a change in management (expected to be completed by October 2015) and the signing of performance contracts that will ensure proper bank monitoring during the restructuring period. Staff urged a monitoring on a consolidated basis but the authorities argued that their reporting system only allows that for certain indicators (e.g., cost-to-income ratio). Close supervisory scrutiny of public banks will also be needed throughout the restructuring period to ensure proper monitoring of regulatory compliance, adherence to sound lending policies, and proper internal governance and risk management. Page 34 Box 7. Tunisia: Why Focus on Public Banks? Solvency ratio . Stricter prudential rules on classification of NPLs and provisioning ratios have The performance of the Tunisian banking system has long been hampered by the performance of the main three state-owned banks. These banks are systemic—currently representing 37 percent of banking assets and around 28 percent of banking sector deposits. The role of the State in these banks has diminished over the past decade but remains important as the latter is the main shareholder in all three state-owned banks: STB (51 percent); BH (57 percent), and BNA (65 percent). The performance of these public banks has been weaker than for the rest of the industry, weakening credit allocation and governance for the whole sector: highlighted the weaknesses of the state-owned banks, which no longer meet minimum regulatory solvency ratios. As a result, in the absence of recapitalization, the solvency ratio for public banks was four times less than the private sector, with two banks severely undercapitalized and one insolvent (but still operating because of forbearance). Deterioration of asset quality. NPLs in public banks are more than double the level of private banks, underlying the weak quality of public bank clients which account for a larger share of their loan portfolio (13 percent) than for private banks (8 percent) and insufficient loan recovery capacity. Weaker economic activity will weaken further loan quality—particularly for the STB which is heavily exposed to the tourism sector (54 percent of its loan portfolio). NPLs but also related to a higher dependence of gross income on interest margins. the largest users of the CBT refinancing facility (40 percent of total refinancing). The state-owned banks also suffer from an unfavorable strategic positioning . They have for years followed strategic directions—in agriculture, housing, or hotel— that were not sustainable over the long term, particularly since these were often used for easy access to finance “connected parties”. As a result, their business model has seen a steady erosion of their market share vis-à-vis private banks. According to World Bank calculations, other things being equal, it was estimated that the loss of market share would have continued at a rate of 1 to 1.5 percent per year in the absence of a public bank restructuring. NPLs (in percent of total loans) NPLs, net of provisions Provisions (in percent of NPLs) Liquidity ratio ROA 1/ ROE 1/ Capital adequacy ratio (CAR) Tier 1 capital adequacy ratio (CAR) Refinancing . Growth in deposits of public banks has been limited forcing public banks to become Profitability of public banks is also half of private banks, mainly because of the bearing cost of Source: Tunisian authorities. 1/ Data is for 2014. Financial Soundness Indicators, March 2015 Public banks Private banks Resolution of nonperforming loans is essential for bank restructuring. The creation of a system-wide Asset Management Company (AMC) to deal with distressed debt was envisaged in the revised 2014 budget—with an initial focus on tourism sector debt. Its effectiveness requires parliamentary adoption of the AMC law, which is likely to be delayed. Staff recommends adoption of the law as long as it remains in line with best international practices (such as with regards to loan resolution superpowers, fair transfer pricing, and governance) and is not a vehicle for bailing out defaulted borrowers. In the absence of a law meeting these prerequisites and helping address the high NPL issue, staff and the authorities agree that priority should be given to improving the management of NPLs by individual banks through swift adoption of the new bankruptcy law Page 35 strengthening creditor rights and an effective resolution framework. The passage of this law is expected in October 2015. Well-designed measures to buttress viable tourist entities weakened by the fall in the sector will limit further build-up of NPLs. In response to the Sousse attack, a package of exceptional measures facilitated the rescheduling of new loans granted to active tourist establishments (MEFP ¶25). While concurring with most of the relief measures, staff warned against an indefinite moratorium on non-performing loans and advocated strict eligibility criteria. The authorities agreed with staff that the prudential treatment of the relief measures should be strictly time-bound, transparent and complemented with corrective action plans; otherwise they could result in regulatory forbearance and ever-greening of loans with the risks to be further extended to other sectors. Major Prudential Regulations Adopted Since 2011 Governance: Strengthening of bank governance – circular dated 20 May 2011. Solvency: Increase of the minimum capital adequacy ratio from percent to 10 percent, strengthening of large exposures regulation— circular dated 29 June 2012. Strengthened regulations and improved banking supervision are essential to reduce the buildup of risks. Since the Revolution, new regulations on governance, solvency ratios, concentration risk norms, and liquidity ratio have been established. A further upgrading of these norms is required to ensure regulatory convergence toward international standards. Pending further hiring of experienced staff, major challenges lie in urgently enhancing supervisory intensity, both for public and private banks. Staff and the authorities concurred on the need for more risk-based supervision, which will be enhanced through the hiring of new bank supervisors (SB) and strict adherence to the sequencing detailed in the medium-term strategic plan designed with Fund TA (MEFP ¶29). Staff regretted delays in implementing the full bank reporting system designed last year with Fund TA, and welcomed the authorities’ commitment to apply sanctions to banks violating existing prudential norms. Provisioning: Additional provisioning requirements based on NPL seniority— circular dated 30 December Liquidity: Introduction of the new liquidity ratio— circular dated November Efforts to strengthen the banking resolution framework are progressing . The draft new banking law includes important improvements concerning deposit guarantees, bank governance, consolidated supervision, licensing, and the stronger resolution framework. Staff and the authorities agreed that additional changes concerning supervisory enforcement, early intervention, and resolution are needed to make sure the law is consistent with good international practices. Staff regretted delays in parliamentary approval of the law, and urged the authorities to accelerate the preparation process, recognizing that the consultation period with the banking industry and the stakeholders concerned by this legislation represent a risk for its timely adoption. Page 36 Reduced state intervention would help promote financial sector development in the medium term. Government’s direct control of three main public banks and its minority participation in nine small banks (about 10 percent of banking assets) may continue to create distortions in the future if public banks continue financing loss-making state-owned enterprises, provide financing on non-commercial terms, or extend credit based on connections. The authorities noted that the State has a key role to play and that there are no plans to reduce state participation in the three state-owned banks, although the search for technical partners to help with the restructuring process of some banks is underway. Further efforts to develop capital markets are needed . The absence of functioning secondary markets for bonds and low stock market capitalization (about 20 percent of GDP, and listings dominated by banks) means that capital markets continue to play a small role in allocating credit across economic sectors and maturities. Development of a yield curve—including through reduced emphasis on long maturities and a regular debt issuance program independent of seasonal cash fluctuations—the adoption of mark to market valuation, and the development of new corporate governance standards would create incentives to trade. The authorities agreed that non- bank financial sector development is also a priority that needs to be addressed to boost private sector development. An overall strategy in these areas will be developed over the next few months—with help from World Bank TA. Access to finance could also be improved by strengthening microfinance institutions Major steps forward were taken in 2011 through the adoption of the new microfinance law and the creation of a new supervisory authority. However, microfinance activities remain too low (loans of microfinance institutions only represent 0.3 percent of total loans by banks), with authorities’ efforts focused initially on reinforcing the capacities of the supervisory authority. An upgrade of the regulatory and supervisory framework, removal of existing caps on lending rates, and appropriate accounting norms would also help in this area. Boosting competitiveness through structural reforms The absence of a business environment conducive to growth is among the top constraints to growth and private sector development in Tunisia. Distortions in the regulatory framework—through authorization requirements, investment restrictions, or fiscal advantages— provided privileged access to connected firms and limited the entry of new firms (e.g., sectors in which investment face restrictions account for over 50 percent of the Tunisian economy). To address the challenges and the heavy cost of bureaucracy, the authorities have over the last three years initiated a number of reforms, some of which are yet to be completed: Reform of the investment code and existing regulations. Staff regretted the delay in adopting the investment code (now expected in November 2015). It, however, welcomed the latest version of the code—which has been revised for a third time in three years—as it proposes to increase market access, simplify investment regulations, and rationalize complex incentives that used to expose different sectors to regulatory arbitrage (¶37). Staff welcomed the current proposals of moving all remaining tax incentives from the investment code to the tax code and Page 37 stressed the need to limit the number of “sectoral” decrees needed to implement the investment code. Staff also welcomed the authorities’ continued determination to simplify administrative procedures (¶38). Reforming the competition and bankruptcy laws. Staff welcomed the passage of the new competition law, which would help remove discretionary application of business regulations and open up key product markets. The approval of the bankruptcy law—in parliament for the past two years—would strengthen creditor rights, and, as a consequence ease banks’ reluctance to lend. The authorities reiterated their commitment to implementing these laws, which will be a cornerstone of Tunisia’s new and more inclusive growth model. A PPP framework. Staff regretted delays in the final approval of the PPP law, currently in parliament, as the framework would mobilize significant private resources for public infrastructure investment. The authorities stressed the need for larger consultations to increase reform ownership, and avoid misconceptions of “privatization” associated with PPPs Labor market reforms should be phased-in quickly. The structural unemployment problem in Tunisia—which is also characterized by important skills mismatches between labor demand and supply—requires changes in existing labor market rules and regulations that carefully balance better protection to workers with more flexibility to firms. To date, action in this area focused on scaling up training programs and SME support program. The tri-partite dialogue (between government, business and labor unions) process on this issue—started in 2013 during the political transition process—has yet to agree on a comprehensive National Employment Strategy (NES), which would be framed into a five-year horizon (MEFP ¶42). Staff urged the authorities to speed up completion of the NES through identification of specific measures to reform the labor market (including through reviewing the rigid hiring-firing policies, worker protection system, and public/private sector compensation). Greater data transparency should accompany efforts to create a more inclusive society (MEFP ¶30 and 43). Staff urged the authorities to bring the existing AML/CFT regime in line with the 2012 FATF standards, notably with respect to implementing targeted financial sanctions. It also welcomed efforts to strengthen the institutional framework for statistics, including the imminent adoption of the Ethics Charter for Statistics. Fund TA will continue to support the authorities’ efforts to strengthen the national accounts, fiscal and balance of payments statistics.