Output Gap and Potential Output Security challenges and social tensions cloud the near-term outlook, but a pickup in reform implementation improves medium-term prospects . The terrorism threat, highlighted by the tragic Bardo and Sousse attacks, and persisting social tensions will continue to weigh on the Tunisian economy over the following months, offsetting the improvement in confidence that has followed the completion of the political transition, falling global oil prices, and a modest rebound in Europe. The medium-term outlook hinges on reduced security and social tensions and the successful implementation of comprehensive reforms: 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Source: IMF staff estimates. Output Gap Potential Growth Rate Cyclical Real GDP Page 18 Growth for 2015 has been revised down to 1 percent (from 3 percent under the program), reflecting the weak performance in H1 2015, work stoppages in the phosphate sector, and the strong impact of the terrorist attacks on an already beleaguered tourism sector that will likely trickle down to the broader economy and further deteriorate economic confidence (Box 3). The drag on economic activity will likely carry over to the first half of 2016, but relief measures and a gradual recovery in tourism flows will help improve growth prospects in the medium term, with Tunisia projected to reach its estimated potential of 4.7 percent by 2018 (Box 4). A moderate credit recovery, better resource allocation as financial sector reforms bear fruit, increasing public and private sector investment, and the reduction in input costs arising from declining oil prices will all contribute to the growth recovery. The recent blow to the tourism industry will increase unemployment rates in the coming months, but they will eventually decline as growth converges toward potential. Headline inflation would remain contained. Continued implementation of a prudent monetary policy and low food and energy prices should reduce inflation to 4.4 percent by end 2015 and to less than 4 percent over the medium term. The current account deficit would narrow only marginally to 8.5 percent of GDP in 2015, as the drop in tourism revenues (one-third of annual tourism receipts are typically generated during the summer) and low oil and phosphate exports offset gains seen earlier in the year from lower imports and exceptional exports of olive oil. A more significant improvement is expected over the medium term, driven by a rebound in tourism and remittances, a pickup in manufacturing, oil and phosphate exports, and reduced energy and food imports. Reserve levels will remain above four months of import coverage in 2015, helped by higher World Bank disbursements and renewed international market access. Over the medium term, greater exchange rate flexibility is assumed in the baseline to correct for an overvalued exchange rate, and gross reserves are expected to gradually improve and eventually cover 5.6 months of imports by 2020 (Annex I). Tunisia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2014–20 Real GDP growth (in percent) Consumer price index (CPI), (period average, in percent) Current account (percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (US$ billions, eop) Gross official reserves (months of next year's imports) Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Prel. Proj. Page 19 Box 3. Tourism Sector: Economic Impact of the Recent Terror Attacks Tourism is important for jobs and foreign exchange earnings in Tunisia. With annual turnover of about 3 billion dinars, it accounts for about 7 percent of Tunisian GDP and 10 percent of exports of goods and services. The sector directly employs people across the value chain of 230,000 hotel rooms and roughly 190 tour operators and travel agents. It accounts for 15 percent of employment—including jobs in a range of ancillary and supporting services, such as restaurants, taxis and associated retail and artisanal outlets. However, over the past decade, the sector has been crippled by structural failures, reflecting an outdated business model (relying on sun, sand, and sea), poor governance, and over-reliance on debt that was generously provided by state-owned banks and connected lenders. Since 2011, a weak external environment worsened existing structural weaknesses. The uncertainty linked to the political transition and increased regional turmoil held back tourism flows, particularly from Europe; the latter account today for 45 percent of arrivals (from 70 percent in 2010) and represent close to 90 percent of room-nights. By 2014, tourism-linked foreign exchange inflows had started to recover from 2011 lows of $1.6 billion to $2.1 billion in 2014—but these were 16 percent below pre-revolution levels. By the end of the political transition in December 2014, tourist arrivals—with increasing numbers from the Maghreb and Eastern Europe replacing more traditional clients from Western Europe— and room-nights remained 15 and 22 percent below pre-revolution levels, respectively. Tunisia: Arrivals and Tourism Receipts Tunisia: Room-nights and Occupancy Rates Europe Maghreb Other Tourism receipts (USD million) Europe Maghreb Other Occupancy rate (%, rhs) Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Sources: Tunisian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Growth. The drop in tourism receipts and employment will also impact the transport and artisanal Against this background, the impact of terror attacks has been devastating. The Bardo and the Sousse tragedies prompted a 45-50 percent cancellation of existing bookings to Tunisia, emptying hotels at the height of the summer season. Tourist arrivals from Europe declined by 70 percent (y-o-y) in July alone. Tunisia’s National Tourism Office estimates that about 85-90 percent of the over 800 registered hotels are already experiencing financial difficulties or are in the process of shutting down. For the year as a whole, tourism inflows are expected to decrease by 45 percent (to about $1.1 billion) and arrivals will decline to less than 5 million people (from 6 million people in 2014), despite Maghreb tourist arrivals expected to increase or remain constant. The implications for the broader economy are significant: industry—and is expected to reduce growth by an additional 0.6 percentage points (to about 1 percent). Domestic agricultural output (e.g. fresh fruits or vegetables) is also expected to be impacted by falling demand from hotels. the foreign exchange market. revenues are less than 0.1 percent of GDP. The general slowdown in economic activity will however translate into much larger revenue losses, which will be amplified by the relief measures introduced. 25 percent of the banking sector and 40 percent of the tourism sector loan portfolio. The hotels’ financial difficulties will likely feed into higher NPLs, thereby hitting banks earnings and liquidity (for comparison, in the year following the 2002 Djerba attack, NPLs as a share of total loans rose by 3 percent). Also, vulnerabilities at one large state-owned bank will increase in view of its large exposure to the tourism sector. External. The current account deficit will widen by 2.5 percent of GDP, putting additional pressures on Fiscal. The direct impact from lower turnover in tourism establishments is limited as the related tax Banks. Tourism sector loans represent less than 7 percent of the total loan portfolio, but NPLs are Page 20 Box 4. Tunisia’s Potential Growth Source: IMF staff estimates. Tunisia: Compounded Sectoral Growth Rates, Tunisia enjoyed solid growth rates in the 30 years preceding the revolution . Rates averaged about 4.5 percent per year in 2000–10, after peaking at close to 5 percent in the 1990s, driven by manufacturing, transportation and communications. This performance was helped by a gradual liberalization of foreign trade and investment, with capital accumulation as the main growth driver while labor and productivity were lagging. Total Factor Productivity (TFP) has been declining, with its drop at the onset of the global financial crisis at the core of the slump in growth in 2008–10. The TFP decline was highest for agriculture and manufacturing, while government interference and connected lending stifled the development of financial and hospitality services. During that period, Tunisia failed to reallocate resources away from less productive sectors and into sectors with higher potential (i.e., high- value-added manufacturing and services). Staff’s analysis shows instead that Tunisia moved toward low- value-added industries (e.g., textile, machinery assembly, mineral products). Despite the contraction of GDP, there is no evidence of a reduction in potential growth following the revolution. Convergence of production factors to their pre-revolution trends would support a gradual recovery, with growth averaging about 3.3 percent per year until 2020 in a muddle-through no reform scenario. However, this growth performance would not be sufficient to make a significant dent in unemployment or raise living standards. Structural reforms could significantly improve Tunisia’s growth potential. Based on cross-country regressions, policies to remove the most binding constraints to growth— increasing access to finance, improving the business environment, and reducing macroeconomic risks—would push Tunisia’s growth potential up by about 1.5 percent, and could raise average growth in 2015–20 to 4.3 percent (Staff’s baseline scenario). Additional reforms, building on international best practices and tailored to the Tunisian situation, could further improve growth in the medium term. These include: improving labor regulations; promoting greater trade integration with fast-growing markets and with global value chains; raising infrastructure investment; and leveraging the large and successful Tunisian diaspora to acquire skills, business and finance. Implementing all these reforms would foster higher investment and boost productivity, with potential growth almost doubling. Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMFstaff calculations. Potential growth derived if each of the factors underlying potential productivity (e.g. business environment, modern production methods), capital (e.g. financial development, infrastructure, openness), and labor (e.g., labor market efficiency) are increased to average EMDC levels. For simulation details see Mitra et al. (forthcoming). Additional Growth If Underlying Structural Variables Tunisia: Contribution to Growth, 2000-11 Reach EMDC Levels /1 TFP GDP Growth Source: IMF staff estimates. Additional reforms Labor Capital Human Capital Basic reforms (in percent) Productivity Capital Labor Growth ‐ Page 21 Risks are high, and tilted to the downside (RAM). Economic confidence in Tunisia will continue to hinge on improvements in the security situation, with terrorist threats and spillovers from the crisis in Libya ― including refugee inflows ― representing a key challenge. Tunisia’s exposure to Europe—70 percent of its trade—makes it vulnerable to a protracted period of slower global growth and surges in global financial volatility. An upsurge in political instability—including through the inability to build consensus in a coalition government representing distinct political perspectives —or further social tensions could worsen the composition of the fiscal adjustment or delay structural reforms, exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and lowering the growth potential. Domestic risks to reforms—from vested interests—are also strong and will need to be mitigated by a strong outreach and communications campaign by the government. The authorities broadly share staff’s views on the economic outlook and risks. They saw upside potential for growth over the medium term as political stability is entrenched, security threats are controlled, Europe recovers, and reforms are implemented to transform the economy and help Tunisia move up the value chain. The authorities expect private demand to remain the main driver of growth, as banks restart playing their financial intermediation role. They agreed that macroeconomic and financial sustainability of Tunisia’s growth path will require less reliance on consumption and imports. The authorities also agreed that risk mitigation measures will require a strong outreach campaign and overcoming administrative and legislative capacity constraints. Page 22 Tunisia: Risk Assessment Matrix* Source of Risk and Relative Likelihood Expected Impact and Recommended Policy Response Domestic Risks High Delays or reversals in structural reforms and program implementation, due to slow progress on addressing banking sector fragilities, a deteriorating fiscal position, and a weakening business environment. High Intensified terrorist activity, triggered by regional conflicts in a context of high youth unemployment, lack of opportunities, and perceived corruption. High High Delays or reversals in structural reforms could lead to growth that is insufficient to reduce high unemployment rates and improve living standards for most. Heightened social tensions, renewed focus on security and loss of confidence would undermine economic activity and also affect the ability to take policy actions, negatively impacting investment and growth. Authorities should (i) improve budget composition by containing current spending, while increasing growth-enhancing capital expenditures; (ii) complete banking sector reforms; (iii) pass long-awaited economic legislation, including on PPP, bankruptcy, investment code, and tax reform; and (iv) build public confidence and ownership through continuous communication. Increased social tensions, triggered by weaker economic activity, and growing public dissatisfaction with deteriorating purchasing power and government policies External Risks High Medium Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions, including through energy price volatility, triggered by abrupt global monetary policy normalization, commodity price volatility, or geopolitical tensions. Global financial and commodity price volatility could destabilize global recovery and financial markets, adversely affecting partner countries’ economies, slowing FDI inflows, and increasing financing needs. Recommended policy responses include: (i) creating fiscal space by containing the wage bill, reforming energy subsidies and the tax system to make room for growth-enhancing priority spending; (ii) countercyclical monetary policy (assuming inflationary pressures are not present); and (iii) completion of banking reforms. Medium Medium Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies, driven by weak potential growth in Europe, and incomplete structural reforms and maturing of the cycle in emerging markets. Growth would be adversely affected through trade, remittances, and investment channels. Authorities should (i) diversify export markets; (ii) pursue bolder and faster structural reforms to increase productivity and competitiveness; and (iii) let automatic fiscal stabilizers operate. Medium High Increased geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, driven by the intensification of ongoing conflicts, heightened risks of fragmentation, and dislocation in the region, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices with negative global spillovers. Growth may fall on account of shaken investor confidence, increased security spending, sharp increases in oil prices, and tighter financing conditions. Authorities should (i) rebuild fiscal and external buffers; and (ii) accelerate economic and structural reforms. *The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 23