The fiscal stance was broadly neutral in 2015 but the structure of the budget has worsened. Above-target expenditure has been offset by stronger than envisaged tax revenues, particularly domestic VAT and some excises, as well as one-off contributions to social security from an amnesty. The fiscal tightening envisaged in the 2015–2017 medium term plan (MTP) did not materialize. The fiscal stance will loosen in 2016. Consolidation is being delayed mostly to accommodate new spending related to election promises and a temporary labor subsidy to ameliorate the impact of the increase in the minimum wage (Box 7). Consolidation is resumed later on, albeit with less ambitious targets than in the 2015–2017 MTP. Enhancing long-term growth and strengthening domestic savings through structural reform remains the backbone of the MTP’s ambitious structural reform agenda. Fiscal targets do not support rebalancing and face important risks . With a modest consolidation of ½ percent of GDP in three years, fiscal policy targets fall short from a stance that would provide sufficient support for the rebalancing and the fight against inflation. They also face important risks. Growth targets for 2016–2017 are about 1 percentage point of GDP above consensus. In absence of such growth, the shortfall in central government revenues could amount to about ¼ percent of GDP. On the positive side, oil prices have declined and may lead to a stronger outturn for energy-related State-owned Enterprises. 20142015201620172018Growth2.94.04.55.05.0Inflation8.28.87.56.05.0CA (percent of GDP)-5.8-4.4-3.9-3.7-3.5Employment rate45.546.146.546.947.4 Medium Term Program Targets Page 26 Box 7. Turkey: The New MTP Targets Provide Less Support to Rebalance the Economy The Medium Term Program (MTP) has ambitious targets and optimistic assumptions . It seeks to accelerate long-term growth through structural reforms and to raise domestic savings to rebalance the economy. It envisages strong growth, reaching 5 percent in 2017, and a current account balance that declines to 3½ percent of GDP. The MTP assumes that the effect of structural reforms will increase potential output growth to 5 percent in two years, with employment increasing quickly. It seeks to reach the 5 percent inflation target, but only in 2018. The non-financial primary surplus target accommodates the minimum wage and other election related spending in 2016, postponing consolidation until 2017. There is scope to improve risk management and enhance reporting, particularly at the fiscal “periphery.” A decade-long decline in debt to GDP, the extension of public debt maturities to reduce annual financing needs, and the adoption of IPSAS 32 accounting standards highlight the government’s efforts to strengthen risk management and reporting. Nonetheless, public-private partnerships (PPP) have been increasing rapidly since 2009, which requires stronger central oversight, approval, disclosure, and anti-corruption measures. However, the government fiscal risk register, alternative macro-fiscal scenarios, and long-term fiscal projections—including on pensions—are not published. Staff recommends a consolidation of 1½ percent of GDP by 2018 . While fiscal sustainability is not a concern, the stronger stance seeks to contribute to (i) support an increase in domestic savings; (ii) facilitate the CBRT’s efforts to reach its inflation target; (iii) boost policy space given the increasing fiscal risks related to the use of PPPs and guarantees, and the leverage and indebtedness of private sector. The consolidation should focus on current expenditure and there is also scope to mobilize revenues—including through higher carbon taxes (Box 8)—and by lowering informality. Investment should not be further cut given still large infrastructure needs, as this would also generate incentives to use PPPs even if the risks outweigh the benefits. The authorities should further strengthen their risk management and reporting. Staff stressed the need for central oversight, approval and disclosure of PPPs. It also highlighted that a fiscal risk statement can help to manage risks, improve economic efficiency and reduce borrowing costs. The authorities assess that the slack in the economy calls for a stimulus in 2016, especially given the strong overall fiscal position . The authorities estimate that output is about Page 27 1 percent below potential and the fiscal impulse will put the economy closer to internal equilibrium, albeit generating some inflationary pressure, which is recognized in the new MTP. A looser fiscal stance is also necessary to accommodate electoral promises. The authorities recognize the need to strengthen the fiscal stance in the medium term to preserve fiscal buffers, to support price stability, and to increase domestic savings. The authorities agreed that the minimum wage increase might have some negative impact, and plan to use some of their fiscal space to ameliorate the effect on firms and the labor market. They agree that the minimum wage will foster domestic consumption, working against the rebalancing of the economy. However, they consider this a temporary shock with consolidation efforts resumed in 2017.