Moderate fiscal loosening in 2017 is appropriate, but a credible medium-term consolidation plan is needed. The projected widening of the general government structural primary balance by ½ percent of GDP in 2017 would support domestic demand, without exacerbating external imbalances. Staff urged authorities to let automatic stabilizers work and argued that an extension of the minimum wage subsidy at an appropriately lower level could be an effective means of supporting growth and employment. Staff welcomed the planned increase in public investment. However, staff cautioned that the announced investment incentives may not be effective to achieve the desired effect, given the high level of uncertainty and elevated private debt burden (Box 2). Tax incentives would have to be well-targeted and supported by macroeconomic stability and rule of law to be effective. While broadly supportive of the authorities’ 2017 expenditure plan, staff considers the authorities’ 2017 revenue projections to be overly optimistic, with the tax-to-GDP ratio projected to increase by 0.4 percent of GDP in 2017. Tax expenditures remain an issue and revisions suggest they are in fact over 3 percent of GDP higher than previously estimated. For 2018-19, the planned reduction of current transfers by 1 percent of GDP in 2018–19 is appropriate, but needs to be backed by specific measures to contain the wage bill, pension and health care spending and limit the increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the medium term. Page 16 Turkey has some fiscal space to provide the recommended temporary stimulus, Access to financing remains solid, despite some increase in costs. The fiscal position is sound: the debt-to-GDP ratio is moderate and is projected to eventually resume its declining trend under the baseline and most stress scenarios; gross financing needs are low, and projected primary balances exceed the debt-stabilizing level over the medium term (Annex IV). However, persistent external imbalances, and dependency of the banking and corporate sectors on external markets with substantial rollover needs, call for prudence in using the fiscal space. Enhanced management of fiscal risks is warranted . Contingent liabilities are increasing, due to continued reliance on PPPs for infrastructure investment. At the same time, the legal and oversight framework for PPPs is fragmented. A growing share of fiscal risks falls outside the Treasury’s established approval and monitoring system and is not public (Box 4). Staff urged stronger central oversight, approval, and disclosure procedures for all public guarantees, backed by a comprehensive PPP framework law. Staff viewed the newly announced investment incentives as adding to existing fiscal risks, as in some cases they would involve the extension of purchase and other guarantees. The recently established sovereign wealth fund, to be funded by privatization receipts and possible capital market financing, carries added potential for fiscal and financial risks. Staff therefore recommended that the governance of the fund should be aligned with international best practices, including published annual reports, audited financial statements, and a transparent investment policy. Staff reiterated its recommendation to publish an explicit fiscal risk statement. Authorities’ views The authorities believe that their policies appropriately address the need to stimulate the economy while remaining fiscally responsible. They emphasized the relatively low level of public debt and its composition as strengths, and reiterated their intention to maintain fiscal discipline. The central government overall deficit is envisioned to remain below 2 percent of GDP throughout the MTP horizon, which would ensure a declining trend in public debt. They believed that the new incentive schemes would boost investment as they offer a wide spectrum of benefits to the potential investors in a flexible manner. The authorities deem fiscal risks to be manageable. They also acknowledged the desirability of expanding fiscal risk disclosure to entities beyond the Treasury, and strengthening PPP governance. The authorities also reiterated their intention to align the sovereign wealth fund with international best practices.