In 2015, monetary tightening was insufficient to lower inflation . The CBRT tightened the monetary stance moderately and in an opaque way by further limiting the share of liquidity at the one-week repo rate. However, inflation is still above target. The CBRT has not normalized its monetary framework . By purposely confusing the signal on the stance, the unorthodox monetary policy framework has impaired monetary transmission and not delivered target inflation. After announcements in August 2015, the CBRT has taken only marginal steps to normalize the framework, eliminating the liquidity facility for primary dealers and simplifying the collateral framework. However full normalization has been postponed. Reserves are below the IMF ARA metric . The CBRT has been intervening in the market through auctions and direct sales of net reserves to importing SOEs. Therefore GIRs have declined and remain well below the IMF assessment of reserve adequacy (ARA) metric. The monetary stance should be tightened . The one-week repo rate should be quickly increased into solidly positive real territory, and be sustained to bring inflation back towards the target. Macroprudential policies cannot be a substitute for such tightening. Given the CBRT’s low credibility and the widespread de facto indexation combined with the recent large minimum wage increase, achieving disinflation solely through monetary tightening could entail high output losses. Instead, monetary policy should be supported by fiscal consolidation and structural reforms Page 24 (decreasing indexation), which would help contain the growth in ULCs, rebalance the economy, and re-anchor expectations. The monetary policy framework should be normalized and communication strengthened . The CBRT should normalize its framework, by narrowing the interest rate band and providing all liquidity demanded by the market at a single policy rate. A normalized framework would facilitate effective CBRT communication and thus help rebuild credibility. In addition, the CBRT should provide clear guidance on how it intends to react to demand and supply shocks, including to the expected increase in inflation in 2016 stemming from the minimum wage hike. Net reserves should be increased to help weather shocks. An increase in gross reserves of the order of US$14 billion in 2016 and another US$6 billion in 2017 would be needed to achieve the ARA metric. Thereafter, they would need to be allowed to grow at the same pace as GDP. The increase in GIR should be accompanied by a commensurate increase in NIR. This could be partly achieved by halting off-market sales and daily FX auctions (while maintaining the option to conduct auctions), and refraining from interventions in the absence of disorderly market conditions. Tighter monetary policy will serve to alleviate pressure on the currency that may ensue, and, market conditions permitting, would allow for opportunistic FX purchases by the CBRT to further strengthen its reserve position. The central bank felt that the current monetary framework has served the economy well and that the stance is appropriate. It has allowed them to set a high marginal rate of funding, while at the same time relieving some of the pressure on banks through a lower average funding rate. They plan for a gradual return to the 5 percent inflation target over the next three years. In this regard, they see the high marginal funding rate as appropriately tight, and stressed that while headline inflation may still remain high until 2016Q2 due to the minimum wage increase and food inflation representing a large share of the CPI basket, other measures of core inflation have started to decline. In addition, they emphasized the role of macroprudential policies in containing financial stability risks associated with excessive consumer credit growth. Given the strong relationship of consumer credit growth and imports, they saw measures to contain the growth of credit as being more important than REER depreciation to reduce external imbalances, especially as they believed the exchange rate was already consistent with fundamentals. Finally, in February the government announced price caps on certain red meat products whose inflation has been particularly elevated. They assess the probability of a sudden stop as low, and do not see the need for additional monetary tightening as recommended by Staff. The monetary framework will be simplified when capital flow volatility is reduced Following the roadmap for simplification announced in August 2015, the CBRT had started to The main difference between gross and net international reserves is accounted for by banks’ FX deposits in the CBRT, which stood at about US$80 billion in the end of 2015, including about US$25 billion of ROM in FX. Page 25 simplify its monetary framework. However, later the authorities considered that it is prudent to delay the simplification process given the recent global financial volatility. Simplification will resume once global volatility subsides. Gross international reserves are expected to stop decreasing after2016Q1 . The CBRT management expects off-market FX sales to the main state-owned energy company (Botaş) as well as on-market FX demand from the only refinery company in Turkey (Tupraş) to decrease in the coming months, driven by delayed effects of lower oil and gas prices. In addition, the amount and frequency of FX auctions may be reconsidered going forward. Taken together, the central bank expects GIRs to stabilize from end-March onward.