Following a strong performance in the preceding year, growth slowed in 2016. In the first half of 2016, GDP Turkey: Real GDP Growth (Percent) growth was 3.9 percent (year-on-year), but its quarter-on-quarter pace decelerated sharply, despite the easing of fiscal and monetary policies. Growth remains consumption-driven, reflecting the boost to real disposable incomes from the January minimum wage hike and low energy prices. Investment is weak, on the back of heightened uncertainty and a sharp deceleration of credit growth. The external sector subtracted from growth, due to the surge in real imports and fall in tourist arrivals. The latter has had a negative effect on a range of sectors, especially for accommodation, Source: TurkStat and staff estimates. transportation, and food services (Box 1). z il K Dec-11Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14Dec-15 quarter-on-quarter year-on-year (rhs axis)Averageq-on-q growth, 2003-15 Page 10 Output contracted in the third quarter, but some Turkey: High Frequency Indicators key: High Frequency Indicators (Indices) pickup is expected by the year’s end. Security concerns and Russian sanctions cut the number of tourists from Europe by a quarter and from Russia by more than two-thirds in January-September. Also, the cereals harvest is estimated to be 9 percent lower than last year’s. The failed coup attempt and its aftermath have further disrupted economic activity. While the outlook for industrial production has recently improved, economic sentiment remains subdued amid heightened uncertainty. Government measures to spur consumption and investment and the gradual removal of Russian sanctions would contribute to the expected pickup of economic activity in the last quarter of 2016. The unemployment rate has increased steadily since March, as the labor force grew faster than employment. The 30 percent minimum wage increase Source: IHS Markit, European Commission, and staff estimates. Note: PMI value of 50 indicates no change from the previous period. Economic sentiment index has a long-term value of 100. boosted average real hourly wages in the formal sector—by more than 10 percent in construction and services, and to a smaller extent in industry. The number of hours worked in the formal sector fell, while employment in the grey economy increased. At the same time, public employment in the education and health-care sectors grew strongly. Between May and July, seasonally-adjusted employment declined by 2.5 percent in industry and 5 percent in construction. Inflation has moderated but remains volatile and well above target. Inflation volatility is mainly driven by unprocessed food and energy prices. The latter reflect oil price changes, the September fuel tax hike and October cut in the administered price Turkey: Non-Agricultural Rate of Unemployment (Percent) Source: TurkStat and staff estimates. of gas, as well as exchange rate pass-through. The economic Turkey: Contributions to Inflation slowdown and REER appreciation dampened core inflation, (Percentage points) though it remains elevated, reflecting unanchored expectations. The central bank (CBRT) has eased monetary conditions in the process of simplifying the monetary framework From March to end-September 2016, the CBRT gradually lowered the overnight lending rate by 250 basis points to 8¼ percent, leading to a commensurate decline in the interbank overnight lending rate. At end-November, the CBRT raised the one-week repo and overnight lending rates after a steep Lira depreciation. In the wake of the failed coup attempt, the CBRT lowered reserve requirements, allowed greater use of gold and foreign currency, and offered unlimited Lira liquidity Source: TurkStat and staff estimates. Dec-14Jun-15Dec-15Jun-16 Unprocessed food and energy inflation Core inflation Inflation Page 11 against FX collateral. In an effort to release FX liquidity, the latter Turkey: Monetary Policy Rates (Percent) was capped again at end-November with higher than the pre-coup attempt limits and changes were made to the reserve option mechanism and reserve requirements in FX. Credit growth slowed markedly, due to both demand and supply factors. The large Lira depreciation in 2015 pushed private debt-to-GDP ratios to multi-year highs, limiting risk appetite (Box 2). The heightened political uncertainty also weighed on corporate investment. On the supply-side, macroprudential measures taken in previous years to rein in household loans proved effective, while banks maintained tight credit standards. Corporate credit growth decelerated, with SMEs loans expansion falling from 21 percent in 2015:Q3 to 6 percent Source: CBRT and staff estimates. Notes: End-of-week data. Five-day moving averages for CBRT and BIST overnight rates. Turkey: Share of NPL and Restructured Loans (Percent) in 2016:Q3. The macroprudential regime was loosened in the Spring and again in September 2016 to support the flagging credit and output growth. Retail credit growth has since picked up from around 4 to 7 percent, led mainly by state-owned banks. In terms of borrowers collateral, house prices have accelerated since 2015:Q2, but housing affordability has deteriorated (Box 3). Bank capital levels remain high, although some buffers are decreasing. Higher bank profits and the credit growth slowdown boosted the system-wide Tier 1 CAR to 13.7 percent (Table 6). However, part of the CAR improvement was due to a relaxation of prudential norms that released provisions and lowered Source: Turkish Bank Association Turkey: Bank Credit Growth (Percent) regulatory risk weights on consumer loans. Regulatory changes reduced the provisioning requirements for restructured loans in the tourism and energy sectors, as well as consumer loans and credit cards. A broader definition of impaired loans that includes restructured credits shows a deterioration in asset quality, especially in the household and SME sectors. Bank profitability has increased, as the drop in domestic funding costs has not been fully passed on to borrowers, and also due to cost saving measures and one-off factors. Banks’ negative on-balance-sheet, net open FX position decreased from minus 30 to minus 8 percent of regulatory capital as residents’ FX deposits declined and the reliance on short term FX funding decreased. The fiscal stance turned expansionary in 2016. The central government overall balance widened in the first half of Source: BSRSA and staff estimates. Notes: 13- week moving averages of end-of-week data adjusted for FX valuation effects by staff. NPL data are of poor quality. In Turkey, even more so due to evidence of: (i) increased loan restructuring; by (ii) problems in loan classification by banks and (iii) deficiencies in the BRSA’s supervision of loan classification practices (Turkey: Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision—2016 Detailed Assessment of Observance). # Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14Dec-15Dec-16 One-week repo rate CBRT funds rate (wght. average) Interbank overnight rate (BIST) CBRT overnight lending/borrowing rate corridor Page 12 2016. Through October, primary expenditures increased by 16.4 percent, on the back of new hires in the education and health sectors, inflation indexation, security spending, and the subsidy for the minimum wage increase. Interest payments decreased, as a result of falling interest rates. The increased spending was partially offset by higher tax and non-tax revenues. Following the failed coup attempt, the government announced a number of temporary tax reductions/exemptions partly offset by an increase in fuel excises. The current Medium Term Program (MTP) envisions a widening of the 2016 general government deficit by around 2 percent of GDP. The public debt is sustainable, but a combination of growth and contingent liability shocks would lead to a substantial increase in the public debt to GDP ratio (Annex IV.) The current account deficit remains sizeable at over 4.5 percent of GDP. The positive contribution from low world oil Turkey: Current Account (Percent of GDP) prices has been broadly offset by the weak tourism season and lower export prices. Non-oil real imports surged in 2016: H1, spurred by the pick-up in consumption and REER appreciation. Turkey’s external position remains weaker than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The current account deficit is 1–4 percent higher than the estimated norm, implying a REER overvaluation of 5–15 percent on average in 2016 (Annex II). Large external financing needs have been comfortably met, but costs have risen. Both the government and the private sector have so far refinanced maturing debt in international Source: TurkStat and staff estimates. Note: The nominator and denominator of the ratios are 4-quarter rolling sums. markets flush with global liquidity. As of 2016:Q3, the pace of external debt accumulation has slowed, reflecting the weakening economy and domestic credit, but also increased investor concerns. Sovereign rating downgrades contributed to a rise in the cost of external funding, with interest rates on syndicated loans increasing by 25-40 basis points. Portfolio inflows turned positive with a net inflow reaching US$8 billion in the first nine months of 2016, following a drought in 2015. The positive trend reversed in 2016:Q4, with non-resident withdrawals of US$2.5 billion by mid-November reflecting Moody’s cut of the sovereign rating to below-investment and the November emerging markets rout. Turkey’s external debt is sustainable, but remains vulnerable to interest and exchange rate risks. Turkey’s external debt of around 60 percent of GDP is vulnerable to valuation shocks (Annex III). Debt service costs are sensitive to tightening of global liquidity conditions and changes in investor sentiment, given the still large share of short-term liabilities and loans with variable interest rates. Net international reserves (NIR) have increased from a low base. NIR (adjusted for public sector FX deposits) increased to about US$33 billion by November 2016, as the CBRT suspended FX auctions in April and reduced FX sales to state-owned energy companies. This, il 2015:H12016:H1 Primary Revenue Primary Expenditure Primary Balance Overall Balance (Percent of semi-annual GDP) Central Government Fiscal Outturn Page 13 alongside the issuance of government debt in foreign currency and CBRT measures to provide Lira liquidity against FX collateral, contributed to the increase in gross international reserves (GIR) (Figure 2). The November CBRT measures in support of the weakening Lira pared some of the gains in GIR, which hover slightly above 90 percent of the IMF’s reserves adequacy (ARA) metric. Turkish financial markets have underperformed other large emerging markets in 2016 Markets sagged in the wake of the failed coup attempt, but Turkey was also among the countries most affected by the sell-off of emerging market assets that started in November 2016 (Figure 5).