Staff welcomed the simplification of the monetary framework. A framework in which liquidity is provided at a policy rate would improve the transmission of monetary policy. Future steps in this direction should aim at closing the gap between the average cost of CBRT funding and the policy (one-week repo) rate and making the interest rate corridor symmetric around that rate, while keeping the real cost of liquidity provision in positive territory. This would help better manage the Page 15 variability of interest rates and liquidity certainty, and increase the clarity of the monetary policy signal. The increase of the one-week repo rate at end-November helps achieve this objective. Staff advised maintaining the current monetary stance. Staff saw the current positive, real CBRT funds rate as balancing the need to contain imbalances and provide a backstop to the slowing economy. The monetary stance should be tightened if the recovery is stronger than expected and/or inflation fails to decline to its target. A tighter monetary stance could be also required to limit excessive Lira volatility and its inflationary spillovers. The enhanced provision of Lira liquidity after the failed coup attempt was appropriate, but this extra liquidity should be gradually withdrawn. Staff recommended increasing international reserves . Staff welcomed the suspension of the regular foreign exchange auctions and reduced FX sales to state-owned enterprises. Conditional on global liquidity conditions being favorable, staff advised a further increase of net international reserves (NIR) through (partially) sterilized interventions communicated in advance to avoid market disruptions, and by increasing the credit limit facility for the EXIM Bank. NIR would need to be increased by about US$10 billion for GIR to reach 100 percent of the IMF’s ARA metric. Authorities’ views The authorities re-affirmed their commitment to complete the simplification of the monetary policy framework. They saw the timing of further steps in the process as being dependent on inflation dynamics and external conditions. The authorities have also started a gradual withdrawal of the extraordinary provision of Lira liquidity against FX collateral in the aftermath of the failed coup attempt. While agreeing on the need to build reserves, they considered the current conditions unsupportive of a rapid accumulation.