The banking sector remains well-capitalized. The impact of exchange rate depreciation and higher interest rates on non-performing loans (NPLs) has been limited. The ratio of NPLs to total loans currently stands at 2.8 percent, although NPLs are slightly higher in recent vintages. Banks were largely able to pass January’s interest rate increase on to their customers, thus their net interest margin remained at around 2 percent. Lower credit growth did dent banks’ profitability, bringing return on equity down to 12½ percent (Box 7). System wide capital adequacy remains above 16 percent, well above regulatory minima. Moreover, capital is almost entirely tier 1. Similarly, the banks’ liquidity adequacy ratios (either at one week or one month maturity, total or FX only) show liquid assets cover more than 100 percent of short term liabilities despite conservative assumptions on the amount of deposits “at risk of flight.” The authorities’ stress tests show a system resilient to significant shocks. Capital Adequacy Ratio and Non-Performing Loans (percent) Non-Performing Loans in percent of total loans (lhs) Capital Adequacy Ratio (rhs) Source: BRSA. Still, banks’ wholesale external foreign exchange funding has risen rapidly throughout the banking system, presenting rollover risk. The sector’s loan-to-deposit (LtD) ratio stands at 114 percent, with the ratio at 84 and 131 percent for foreign (FX) and local currency respectively. Wholesale external funding in FX is, on the margin, financing the expansion of local currency lending. Driven by the interest rate differential, this exposure has risen from US$61 billion in 2009 to US$137 billion at the end of the first quarter of 2014, US$85 billion of which is at short maturity. Banks hedge the exchange rate risk associated with this funding, mainly off balance sheet, and hence the net open FX position of the sector is not large at 0.1 percent of GDP. Still, in case of a reversal of market sentiment, the rollover (refinancing) risk and hence FX liquidity risk associated with the gross exposure is significant. Should these risks materialize, banks’ ROM (and possibly FX reserve requirement deposits) with the CBRT could be used to partially cover the FX liquidity needs. Page 21 Box 7. Recent Evolution of Banking Sector Profitability Profitability has decreased in recent years... (Percent of average equity; May 2004 - July 2014) ROAE ROAA(rhs) Banks’ average profitability has decreased in recent years. Since 2010, loans have doubled, and equity is up by more than 50 percent, but profits have hardly increased. Between 2005 and 2010, ROAEs and ROAAs averaged 23 and 3 percent, respectively but they have now reached levels of 13–15 and 1.5–2 percent, respectively. Lower profitability is largely explained by lower net interest income and less efficiency in the sector . Since the second half of 2010, ROAE has decreased on average by 9.5 percentage points About 80 percent of this reduction is due to a decrease in net interest income while the rest is due to a worsening of net non-interest income. Lower net interest income is largely explained by a contraction of credit to the government which has not been offset by a decrease in interest expenses. Interest income fell by 17.4 percentage points on the back of a 1.8 percentage point decrease in the profitability of the loan book, but mostly due to a decrease in interest from securities of 13.5 percentage point. This, in turn, was the result of a large decline in government securities in the banks’ portfolios which fell from 38 to 16 percent of total assets over the same period. Decreasing profitability is likely to promote a drive for efficiency or consolidation . Over the medium term, banks will need to bring loan growth, equity and profits back into line, with a focus on enhancing margins. This can be achieved via more discipline on pricing, cost efficiencies, risk management, increasing revenue streams from fees, or through sector consolidation. Sources: BRSA and IMF staff calculations. Notes: 6 months moving average as a share of average equity or assets. ... decresing because of much lower credit to the government. (Percent of average equity; May 2010 - July 2014) Loan's income Securities' income Interest expenses Other income Net interest income Sources: BRSA and IMF staff calculations. Notes: 6 months moving average as a share of average equity. ... mainly due to net interest income ... (Percent of average equity; May 2010 - July 2014) Other non-interest income Net non-interest income Net interest income ROAE Sources: BRSA and IMF staff calculations. Notes: 6 months moving average as a share of average equity. ______________________________________________________ This figure overestimates profitability as we use a 6 month moving average of 12 month rolling sum data. Average ROAE for June 2014 based on simple 12 month rolling sum is 12.8 percent (see Table 6 in the Staff Report). Page 22 Banks also remain indirectly exposed to exchange rate risk through foreign exchange lending to non-financial corporates. Driven in part by tax and prudential policies encouraging moving FX lending onshore, these loans have increased to some US$151 billion in July 2014 from less than US$40 billion in 2008. However, prudential regulations limit indirect foreign exchange rate risk by limiting these loans to firms with exports receipts and larger companies with greater access to financial hedging and FX assets. A recent micro-based study by the central bank indeed suggests part of this net open position is hedged by exports receipts. Some US$27 billion in FX-indexed loans, however, is not subject to the same regulations, even though they carry similar risks. Prudential regulation prohibits household credit in FX. Staff complimented the authorities on the implementation of measures to slow consumer credit growth and strengthening of stress tests. After tightening credit card limits and increasing provisioning rates in the Fall of 2013, the authorities implemented further limits on installment purchases effective February 2014 (Annex IV). As a consequence, consumer credit growth has slowed from almost 40 to 18 percent (13-week moving average, annualized) in the year to August 2014. Staff is further encouraged by the authorities’ plan to introduce general debt-to-income limits for consumer lending. Staff also welcomed significant improvements in stress testing methodologies. Staff also argued that maintaining a level playing field is essential for supervision, and to preserve confidence. To preserve financial stability, additional macroprudential measures targeting banks’ wholesale external FX financing could be considered. Specifically, to slow FX leverage in the banking system, the authorities could, after a comprehensive quantitative impact study, consider a menu of options (Box 8). Such policies—which have been successfully implemented in other countries (see selected issues paper)—would contribute to a gradual decrease of FX leverage in the banking system, thus preserving its resilience. At the same time these measures would likely slow the growth in FX lending to companies. While these policies would indirectly affect domestic demand, staff cautioned they are not a substitute for tighter macroeconomic policies. In addition, the mission suggested other possible measures to reduce incentives for the non-financial corporate sector to take on exchange rate risk. Staff argued that since FX lending to unhedged corporations is riskier than Lira loans, higher risk weights (i.e., requiring additional capital charges) and/or additional provisioning on FX loans could be considered. Staff advocated that the prudential treatment (in particular eligibility requirements) of FX-indexed lending be brought into line with that of FX lending, as the risks are the same. While offshore FX borrowing is not prohibited, in 2013, the authorities introduced a levy of up to 3 percent of principal on such borrowing. The authorities decided to start remunerating (as of November 2014) banks’ required reserves in TRL as a way to reduce their incentives to leverage in cheaper foreign exchange funds (see Annex IV). Page 23 Sources: BRSA and IMF staff calculations. Notes: Wholesale funding is defined as total liabilities minus deposit as a share in total assets. Wholesale LTD TL (rhs) Box 8. Containing Wholesale Foreign Exchange Funding in the Banking Sector FX wholesale funding doubled to extend Lira loans. (Percent; January 2010 - July 2014) Banks’ wholesale funding in foreign exchange has increased in recent years to fund Lira loans . Over the last few years, banks have increased cheap wholesale funding in foreign exchange to extend Lira loans. For the sector as a whole, the gap between foreign exchange liabilities and deposits has increased to TL397 billion (some US$180 billion or 21 percent of total assets), and the Lira loan to deposit ratio now stands at 131 percent. In tandem, on-balance sheet FX leverage has increased. Partly as a result of the rapid increase in wholesale funding in foreign exchange, the consolidated on-balance sheet net open FX position has increased to US$44 billion. This is almost fully hedged, but at increasing cost of off-balance sheet counterparty and rollover risk. Reserve requirements on FX liabilities are designed to discourage short term borrowing but are obviously low if aimed at discouraging foreign exchange funding. Several price-based macroprudential measures could be considered . The reserve requirement differential between foreign exchange and Lira liabilities could be increased. Additionally, reserve requirement rates could be adjusted to discourage banks’ short term FX wholesale borrowing. Also, the remuneration differential between Lira and foreign exchange reserve requirements could be increased. The overall aim of all these price measure would be to decrease banks’ spread between borrowing in Lira and foreign exchange. Consideration should also be given to complementary non-price measures . For instance, a ceiling on the use of derivatives for FX hedging purposes while keeping the current net open position limits, or on the non-core to core foreign exchange liabilities ratio would have the obvious impact of containing wholesale foreign exchange funding. A ceiling on the Lira or overall loan to deposit ratio would force banks to reduce wholesale foreign exchange funding to the extent that this is used to fund Lira loans. Any macroprudential measure needs to be supported by a comprehensive impact study . Price measures aimed at curbing foreign exchange wholesale funding need to take into consideration the ability of banks to pass on the additional costs to creditors or debtors. Only non-price measures can deal with highly inelastic supply of foreign exchange liabilities or demand for assets. Total On balance sheet Off balance sheet Net Open position Page 24 Turkey: Bank Loans to the Construction Sector Staff noted the increased loans flowing in to the construction sector, partly in foreign currency. Loans to the construction sector—which account for 6½ percent of GDP—have risen sharply over the last year. Employment in the sector, which contracted significantly this year, might indicate some sectoral slowdown. So far, however, there has not been an increase in construction- related NPLs in the banking sector. Nevertheless, staff cautioned that the construction sector in general, and residential construction in particular, do not necessarily have a natural foreign currency hedge: even if rents and purchase prices are indexed to foreign currency, incomes are not, leaving developers exposed to FX risk. In addition, the allocation of resources to construction may prevent them from being used in more productive sectors. Therefore, staff advised to carefully monitor lending to the construction sector, and discourage unhedged FX lending to this sector. 1/ excl. non-performing loans Source: BRSA. in percent of total loans (lhs) in billions of Lira (rhs) Turkey has made significant progress in enhancing its anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework. It has addressed the deficiencies which had prompted closer monitoring by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), including by adequately criminalizing terrorist financing and establishing procedures to identify, freeze, and confiscate terrorist assets. In October, Turkey was removed from the FATF’s list of countries with strategic AML/CFT deficiencies and FATF no longer calls on countries to consider the risk emanating from such deficiencies. Authorities’ views The BRSA believes the banking system is healthy and the regulatory framework is adequate. They point to high capitalization, low NPLs, and good liquidity buffers. While they recognized declining banks’ profitability in the face of lower consumer credit growth and fee restrictions imposed for consumer protection purposes, studies suggest the impact will remain manageable. They also pointed out that recent macroprudential measures have slowed the growth of household leverage. In addition, they have started impact studies related to plans to introduce prudential debt-to-income limits for consumer loans. They see all these measures as further prudential steps to reduce risks to financial stability. The authorities agree that rollover risk linked to banks’ wholesale external funding in foreign exchange has increased in recent years. However, they emphasize both the ease of obtaining such funding and the banks’ substantial FX deposits at the CBRT associated with ROM and FX reserve requirements. With respect to FX risk in the broader economy, the authorities point to Page 25 their micro-based study that suggests many of the corporates borrowing in FX are naturally hedged, and to anecdotal evidence suggesting some of the loans are also covered by FX collateral. At this time, the BRSA does not see a need for additional macroprudential measures targeted at banks’ wholesale external foreign exchange funding, pointing out this funding does not translate to domestic FX lending. Overall, the authorities see their prudential and macroprudential policies as an integral part of their macroeconomic management toolkit, to be used in pursuit of rebalancing the economy. Finally, the authorities were pleased with FATF’s recognition of their efforts to improve the AML/CFT framework.