Bank buffers are above regulatory minima, but continue to deteriorate . Banks had an average capital adequacy ratio of 15.6 percent (13.2 percent Tier-1) at the end 2015. Macroeconomic stress tests by the supervisor and the central bank show that banks are resilient to significant shocks, and prudential regulation prohibits providing household credit in FX. However, return on average equity (ROAE) has declined to 11.3 percent, partly as a consequence of compressed net interest margins and fee rebates the banks had to pay their customers. This may restrict opportunities for banks to raise capital, at a time where capital increases may be needed for some banks to stay above the 12 percent level (at which more intense regulatory scrutiny starts to apply). Total debt of non-financial corporates has also increased rapidly in recent years. The supervisor’s stress testing models include assessments of credit, interest rate, and exchange rate risk. The upcoming FSAP will discuss these models and provide detailed assessments of capital adequacy and liquidity under stress. Page 28 Box 8. Turkey: Environmental Taxes Turkey is ahead of other emerging markets in addressing the challenge of pricing energy consumption at a level that reflects its true costs, including environmental and health costs (carbon emissions and hence global warming, the impact of air pollution on health, and the bearing on traffic congestion, accidents and road damage.) Faced with the need for fiscal consolidation after the 2001 crisis, the authorities raised excises on fuels and reformed the energy sector, which not only strengthened public finances but also helped the environment and reduced negative externalities. Nonetheless, there is still ample room to further reduce post-tax subsidies , particularly for coal, which has a significant impact on local air quality. Moreover, the specific excise taxes on gasoline and diesel have not changed for the last three years, which implies a decline in the real value of the tax. Macroprudential measures and low growth have curbed credit growth and slowed the pace at which leverage is increasing (Appendix E). FX-adjusted credit growth has decreased to 14 percent on an annual basis. FX deposits have increased in reaction to the Lira depreciation, generating lower demand for FX wholesale funding. Although growth in FX deposits stopped in 2015H2, the switch from non-core to core FX liabilities continues as overall credit growth is lower. In addition, recent macro prudential measures discouraging short term wholesale FX funding are starting to have an effect, lengthening the maturity of FX funding. However, macroprudential measures have yet to meaningfully reduce (indirectly, by containing systemic risk) external Since October 2015, reserve requirement ratios for short-term FX liabilities were further increased, but only for new liabilities emerging after August 2015. Remuneration of TL reserves has increased by 200 bps. The full impact of these measures is expected to be felt only in 2018. TurkeyEmerging Market Economies Pre-tax subsidies Global warming Local air pollution Vehicle externalities Foregone tax revenue Post-tax Subsidy by ProductandComponent, 2013 ( Percent of GDP ) TurkeyEmerging Market Economies Petroleum Coal Natural gas Electricity Source : IMF staffcalculations. Page 29 imbalances: credit growth (while decreasing) continues to be high and banks continue to intermediate a large share of Turkey’s external debt. Still, banks’ wholesale external foreign exchange funding has risen rapidly. The sector’s loan-to-deposit (LtD) ratio stands at 119 percent, with the ratio at 89 and 142 percent for foreign (FX) and local currency respectively. Wholesale external funding in FX is, on the margin, financing the expansion of local currency lending. Driven by the interest rate differential, this exposure has risen from US$61 billion in 2009 to US$135 billion in October 2015. The exposure at short maturity has decreased marginally over the last two years, to US$78 billion (Figure 4a). Banks hedge the FX risk associated with this funding, mainly off-balance sheet, and hence the net open FX position of the sector is small at 1 percent of regulatory capital. Rollover risk and indirect credit risk associated with FX lending have increased. The rollover risk and hence FX liquidity risk associated with the gross exposure is significant. Should these risks materialize, banks’ deposits with the CBRT under the reserve option mechanism (ROM), and possibly FX reserve requirement deposits could be used to partially cover the FX liquidity needs. In addition, banks face indirect credit risk stemming from their FX and FX-indexed loans to NFCs. The NFC sector’s net open foreign exchange position has increased from US$67 billion at end-2009 to US$174 billion at end-October 2015. Anecdotal evidence suggests part of this net open position is hedged or covered by FX collateral, but data gaps prevent quantification. In addition, the gradual introduction of Basel III may increase the need for banks to raise capital. New risk weights and countercyclical and systemic capital buffers will be phased in, starting this year. First, risk weights on banks’ FX-denominated required reserves and ROM deposits at the CBRT will increase in April 2016. At the same time, risk weights on consumer and mortgage lending will be lowered, in anticipation of introducing debt-to-income ratios. Second, certain subordinated loans will no longer be counted as Tier 2 capital. Taken together, these measures are expected to lower the average CAR in the banking system by about 0.6 percentage points. The BRSA has also announced the detailed schedule of the introduction of additional capital buffers. While the schedule foresees a gradual phase in of these buffers over the period 2016–19, the required minimum CAR will increase by a total of 4.5–7 percentage points. Taken together, these developments may put many banks CAR close to or even below the required minimum, thus Page 30 necessitating capital increases. Without such increases banks’ capacity to lend may be curtailed. Over the medium term, the move toward IRB risk weighting may increase the capital ratio, providing some relief. The upcoming FSAP will review these issues in detail. Macroprudential policies should be strengthened, targeting banks’ wholesale FX external financing. Specifically, current reserve requirement measures aimed at lengthening the maturity of banks’ external financing as well as the net stable funding ratio could be phased in more quickly, while increasing the remuneration differential between FX and Lira reserves could slow overall FX wholesale borrowing. To increase buffers and incorporate the increased indirect credit risk associated with FX lending, higher capital charges should be considered and provisioning on FX loans increased as a prudential measures. Related to this, the prudential treatment of FX-indexed lending should be brought into line with that of FX lending, as it materially pertains to the same risk. Data gaps needs to be closed to better assess risks from FX exposures by NFCs. Finally, the relaxation of risk weights on consumer lending should have awaited the introduction of debt-to- income ratios. The BRSA felt that the sharp slowdown in consumer credit growth allowed for a relaxation of macroprudential measures . Thus, they announced a decrease of risk weights on consumer loans from April. The resulting increase in the banks’ capital ratio is seen as supporting banks at the time they will see pressure on capital adequacy from an increased risk weight on FX deposits at the CBRT. BRSA management explained that they will maintain the maximum maturity restriction on consumer loans, which they see as the more binding constraint. The regulator does not see a need for new measures targeting FX risk . Banks have a negligible net open FX position, and their stock of wholesale external financing has decreased over the last year. In addition, the BRSA feels that FX risk is better managed through the supervisory review process. In the longer term, once income data are available, the regulator plans to move to a 20152016E2017E2018E2019E Minimum CAR8.08.08.08.08.0Minimum Tier I Ratio6.06.06.06.06.0Capital Conservation Buffer 0.00.61.31.92.5Systemic Risk Buffer 1/0.00.25-0.50.5-1.00.75-1.51.0-2.0Countercyclical Capital Buffer0.00.00-2.50-2.50-2.5 Required CAR8.08.85 - 9.19.8-12.810.65-13.911.5-15.0Required Tier I Ratio6.06.85-7.17.8-10.88.65-11.99.5-13.0 Source: BRSA.Note: 1/ Buffer for the systemically most important banks. Required Capital Increase Schedule for Basel III Compliance Page 31 regulatory regime for consumer lending based on debt-to-income ratios. Finally, while the overall foreign exchange risk in the economy remains substantial, the BRSA remains confident that its vigilant supervision and broad powers to address problems in banks as they occur suffice. In this regard, they see no need to accelerate the schedule for the introduction of the net stable funding ratio.