The minimum wage increase will boost consumption . In January 2016, the government raised the net minimum wage by 30 percent, fulfilling an electoral promise. This increase poses challenges for the labor markets, competitiveness, and the fiscal balance (Box 3). In addition, relaxation of macroprudential measures on consumer credit scheduled for April will provide further incentives for consumption. A loosening of the fiscal stance is envisaged for 2016. The nonfinancial public sector primary surplus will decline by about 0.6 percent of GDP, in part due to the impact of the minimum wage increase and spending related to electoral promises (Table 5). For 2017–18, it is expected to recover to its 2015 level as the support related to the minimum wage increase is discontinued and other current spending is contained. Page 16 Box 3. Turkey: The Increase in the Minimum Wage The minimum wage was increased by 30 percent in January . The increase—raising the net minimum wage to about TL1300 per month—is expected to directly impact more than 8 million workers in the formal sector. During the year, in order to ameliorate the impact on the labor market and the corporate sector, the government will provide support amounting TL100 per month for workers earning up to gross TL2,550 per month. The minimum wage is relatively binding in Turkey . Ever since a similar sharp increase in 2004, the ratio of the statutory minimum wage to median wages has been the highest among OECD countries. The increase could reduce female labor participation, currently around 31½ percent. The increase in labor costs will amount to about 1.1 percent of GDP , although government support will reduce the cost for the private sector to about half that amount for the first year. If the impact on the labor market is small, consumption could increase by about 0.6 percent of GDP, boosting the economy and government revenues—reducing the net cost to the government to about 0.3 percent of GDP. However, a less benevolent scenario, with lower formal employment, will hinder growth while increasing the net fiscal costs. Current policies will boost consumption in the near term… In 2016, growth is projected to be 3.8 percent, supported by domestic consumption thanks to minimum wage increase, by the relaxation of macroprudential policies, and accommodative fiscal and monetary policies. Exports are contained due to still lackluster growth in the EU and from oil exporting countries, and because of sanctions from Russia (Box 4 and Table 2). In 2017, growth is projected to decline slightly, reflecting slower real wage growth, recovering oil prices, and the envisaged fiscal consolidation. In the medium term, growth is projected to stabilize at around 3.5 percent, driven by domestic demand. The contribution from net exports is not expected to increase substantially unless reforms improve competitiveness. Minimumwage to Median Wage in OECD Countries (Ratio) Turkey Sources: OECD;and IMF staff calculations. Minimum/maximum 25 -75 percentile Page 17 … but will hardly help rebalancing (Table 3 and Table 4). In 2016, despite low external demand, the CAD would improve to 3.5 percent of GDP mainly because of low oil prices. For 2017–2018, staff assumes a gradual recovery in the EU and in the Middle East, and limited wage growth, helping to push the non-oil balance into a surplus and boosting the overall current account. Nevertheless, over the medium term the deficit is expected to climb again, with the moderately overvalued CPI-REER, higher energy prices and low competitiveness (as real earnings continue to grow more than productivity) returning the CAD to 4.4 percent of GDP. Consequently, external debt, financing requirements, and the NIIP would deteriorate. The external debt and the NIIP would stabilize at around 56 and 60 percent of GDP, respectively (Annex II). External financing requirements would remain at around 26 percent of GDP as the progressive lengthening of external liabilities induced by the recently adopted macroprudential measures would compensate for the negative impact of higher international interest rates (Annex II). On balance, the risks to the medium term baseline are on the downside , leaving Turkey exposed to a sudden stop (Annex I). On the positive side, the recent agreements to reopen EU accession chapters could serve as an anchor for reforms. The intensification of trade with Iran and a stronger than expected recovery in the EU and neighboring countries could further help reduce external imbalances. Finally, the prompt passage and implementation of reforms promised by the new government may yield results earlier than envisaged, with higher than expected productivity gains. On the negative side, the large annual financing needs, low and declining net international reserves (NIR), the short-term nature of capital inflows, and the ever larger negative NIIP are important risks. The US Federal Reserve could accelerate interest hikes and further increase the cost of external financing. Political pressure on the CBRT could re-merge, especially in the process of appointment of several board members. The recent increase in terrorist activity, the unrest in the South East, and any deterioration of the political situation could take a large toll on investors’ confidence. The escalation of sanctions from Russia may further disrupt external demand. The 30 percent minimum wage increase could have a larger than estimated negative impact on formal employment, corporate profits and private investment. On balance, the downward risks can affect the outlook in the short run while the positive risks will affect the scenario only in the medium term, so the balance of risks is negative in the short term. Page 18 Box 4. Turkey: Impact of Sanctions from Russia Toward the end of 2015, Russia introduced restrictions on its economic relationships with Turkey. Sanctions concerned a wide range of food and manufacturing imports from Turkey, tourism and construction services, and included restrictions on hiring Turkish citizens. Visa-free travel to Russia was suspended starting from January 2016. Construction of a nuclear plant project in Turkey was put on hold. Later, restrictions were eased for selected manufacturing companies with production on Russian territory, and construction companies with long-term contracts. Turkey had launched an anti-dumping probe against Russian steel. Before the collapse of the oil price, trade turnover between the two countries was approaching US$38.2 billion. Exports to Russia, including its share in the shuttle trade, constitute about 1.3 percent of Turkey’s GDP. Russia is the second largest country by tourist arrivals, and an important consumer of Turkish food and industrial products. For some manufacturing businesses, about 60–80 percent of total sales were targeted to the Russian market. At the same time, Turkey receives over one half of its gas supply and about one fifths of its steel imports from Russia. While the overall of effect of sanctions on the Turkish current account are likely to be moderate, the tourism sector could face a serious hit . In 2016, Turkish exports to Russia are estimated to fall short by some US$6–8 billion, including about US$3.5 billion losses in the tourism sector. The announcement of economic restrictions created disruptions in late 2015, and it will take time for the producers to redirect exports to other markets. Export revenues, however, were already shrinking as Russia was in recession and some large construction projects were finalized. Meanwhile further reduction of commodity prices will limit the increase in the deficit of Turkish trade with Russia.