Additional policy space should be used in case of a marked growth slowdown. Political uncertainty could take a heavier toll, particularly if actions related to the private sector have the effect of elevating counterparty risk. The weak business climate could further dampen anemic private investment, and bring consumption growth to a standstill. Such dynamics could engender a vicious macro-financial cycle of deleveraging, cuts in investment by over-indebted corporates, and Page 18 ultimately income contraction. Staff argued that in such a situation some additional fiscal space could be used and monetary policy could assign a bigger weight on the output gap than on the overshooting of the inflation target; however, relaxation of macroprudential policy should not be used for countercyclical purposes. The authorities should require prompt recapitalization if stress tests show a capital shortfall. In case of large capital outflows—or, in extremis , a sudden stop—a tighter monetary stance would be unavoidable. In disorderly market conditions, banks and corporates would have difficulties rolling over external debt, and the renewal of FX hedges could become prohibitively expensive. Banks would likely react by not rolling over corporates’ domestic FX loans, precisely at the time when corporates would be under strain to repay them. In such a scenario, a recession would be likely, and the Lira would be under pressure. Under such circumstances, staff argued that the policy rate would need to be increased sharply to avoid a more damaging and disruptive depreciation. Given that net international reserves are low, the scope for credible FX intervention is limited. In the event of a recession, fiscal policy should be loosened, as public debt sustainability is not an immediate concern. Still, corporate default and bank liquidity or solvency problems could occur. In this regard, staff reiterated the recommendation to strengthen supervisory processes and banks’ governance standards and emphasized the importance of putting in place of a robust debt-restructuring framework. Authorities’ views The authorities stressed that the economy has been resilient in the face of several negative shocks. The low level of public debt and its composition, solid bank balance sheets, flexibility of the real sector, and renewed political stability contribute to the stability of the economy.