Private savings are insufficient to finance long-term growth . Current domestic savings are insufficient to finance domestic investment despite the fact that domestic investment, at around 20 percent of GDP, is also low by international standards (see paragraph 9 above). The employment rate is well below the OECD average, especially for women, and unemployment is high . The reasons for this poor performance are rigid labor market rules Page 20 (including high hiring and firing costs) and educational mismatches. In addition, the over 2 million refugees, who have been recently granted working permits, add pressure. The authorities’ reform program lacks prioritization and implementation thus far remains in progress . Proposed reforms include modifying the private pension system to increase funding and participation, reforms in the education sector and labor market to boost competitiveness, boosting revenues by expanding some tax bases, and deepening capital markets to encourage corporates to borrow from domestic markets. The minimum wage is already high in comparison to other EMs in the region. The minimum wage has been increasing in real terms in the last decade, standing over 50 percent of average wages in 2015, and is a key factor pushing up ULCs (paragraph above and Box 3). More than 30 percent of employees are estimated to earn minimum wages or less. Priority should be given to reforms aimed at decreasing the saving-investment gap and increasing competitiveness. Specifically, reforms aimed at increasing funding in the private pension and the severance pay systems (Box 5) while maintaining a tight fiscal stance, should be implemented swiftly. These reforms could raise the private saving rate (IMF 2016b), especially as the current pay-as-you-go pension system remains generous by international standards. Page 21 Box 5. Turkey: Boosting Private Savings The authorities have put raising the private saving rate forward as an important policy goal to reduce the economy’s external vulnerability . They have introduced a subsidized third pillar pension scheme, and, more recently, a savings subsidy for dowry and housing accounts. They have piloted an auto-enrollment funded pension scheme, and are committed to extend the auto-enrollment scheme nationwide. Lastly, proposals to reform the severance pay scheme by making it a funded and transferable benefit have been put forward. The authorities have also used macroprudential tools to limit credit growth, motivated by the aim of curbing excessive household borrowing. Going forward, full and swift implementation of the pension and severance pay reform plans is key Given the urgency of reducing vulnerabilities and the time lag with which new policies will affect the saving rate, efforts should begin as soon as possible. In addition, Turkey’s relatively young population and declining fertility rate imply the country is enjoying a demographic dividend. This provides a window of time to increase savings in anticipation of almost inevitable population ageing in the future. Macroprudential policies limiting credit growth should also remain part of the policy mix. IMF (2016b) provides more details on policy options. These reforms will likely have other benefits besides increasing domestic savings and reducing external vulnerabilities . They include more labor market flexibility through severance pay portability; lowering of old age poverty rates through higher pension savings; and boosting domestic capital market development. They may hence provide an important contribution towards the authorities’ stated goal of boosting the long term growth potential of the economy. The authorities should pursue a prudent minimum wage policy and help integrate refugees into the labor market . Increasing the minimum wage faster than productivity is growing could hinder competitiveness and long-term growth prospects, and foster informality. For this year, the government support will ameliorate the impact on labor costs—although a more focused government support could have reduced the fiscal costs. For the future, it will be important to contain increases in the minimum wage at or below programmed inflation. Integration of the large number of refugees is a difficult economic and social challenge, and will require considerable fiscal effort (it is estimated that over 700000 children require schooling.) However, refugees could provide a boost to economic growth if integrated into the labor market (Box 6). Page 22 Turkey has one of the largest refugee populations in the world. Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis in Box 6. Turkey: Refugees in Turkey March 2011, Turkey has received over 2.5 million refugees. According to the authorities, Turkey has spent over US$10 billion (including foreign contributions of US$0.4 billion) on refugees, since Refugees have had an impact on informal labor markets. By end 2014, 86 percent of refugees had left the refugee camps and moved mostly to the provinces near the Turkish-Syrian border (45 percent) and to Istanbul (14 percent). Until January 2016, refugees were not allowed to work legally and worked only in the informal sector, with possibly some negative effect on the labor market of low-educated, female Turkish workers in informal agricultural jobs. Authorities are working to integrate refugees in the labor market. In January 2016, and also in the context of collaboration with the EU, new legislation allows refugees to work with some restrictions to avoid disruptive effects on the labor market. The authorities are also working on an action plan to improve integration, especially in education (considering the large number of refugees of school age) and housing, also leveraging future grants from the EU. The authorities agree that structural reforms are necessary to reduce external imbalances . Their agenda builds on three blocks: their 10 th development plan, which is in advanced stage of implementation and which they argue will deliver results this year, including more FDI to produce products currently imported, better commercialization of R&D, and the development of capital markets; critical structural reforms in the areas of the rule of law, education, private pensions, the labor market, income tax, and the judiciary, and aim at increasing competitiveness, labor market flexibility, savings, and in this way, potential output; and the enlargement of the custom union with the EU to services, public procurement, and possibly agriculture. Talks are likely to start in 2017H1. In 2016, the coverage of the private pension system will be increased by introducing automatic assignment of workers. Page 23 The authorities shared the view that the raise in minimum wage would have an immediate boost to growth and inflation . They also had concerns about the potential challenges of the wage increase for labor markets and competitiveness. Citing the strong fiscal position, they viewed the temporary labor subsidy as appropriate, because it would reduce the pressure on firms from higher wage bills and ameliorate possible negative consequences on employment and labor market formality.