Strong growth has been accompanied by a persistently large current account deficit and high inflation. Driven mostly by domestic demand growth, Turkey has managed to rebound strongly after the global financial crisis, growing at 9 percent per year on average in 2010–11, but it has since been growing more modestly. The authorities’ policies and large capital inflows have supported domestic demand. However, average inflation has been 7.9 percent with an average current account deficit of 7½ percent of GDP during the period 2010–13. While there was some rebalancing in 2012, this proved short-lived owing to policy loosening. Last year, GDP grew 4.1 percent and the current account deficit widened to 7.9 percent of GDP, financed mostly by short-term debt-creating inflows, while inflation ended the year at 7.4 percent, once again above the 5 percent target. Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. Turkey: Economic Growth and Current Account Deficit Current account deficit (Absolute, Percent of GDP) Real GDP growth (Percent) Ample capital inflows, intermediated by the financial sector, and financial deepening, eased credit constraints and led to rapid growth of private sector credit and consumption. Private savings decreased, opening up a large gap between (low) saving and (modest) investment. Hedged external wholesale foreign currency borrowing has become a key feature sustaining loan growth, and the loan-to-deposit ratio has risen well above 100 percent. Total investment, 2013 (percent of GDP) h C d P K d d h m C h C z V K H h z C x k h P f h z B w d P H k U Gross national savings, 2013 (Percent of GDP) h C d K w d d h P z V h P K H h C x d P z B k H m C k U f h h z C Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook Severe turbulence hit Turkey in early 2014. Fed tapering, loose and opaque monetary policy, and domestic political uncertainty led to a 15 percent exchange rate depreciation early in the year. The authorities initially embarked on unsterilized FX intervention, which resulted in a rapid loss of international reserves. Subsequently, the central bank increased the one week repo rate by 550 basis points and adjusted its policy framework. The banks and corporate sector have shown resilience during this short-lived period of turmoil, with corporate FX losses not translating into non-performing loans. Page 6 Reducing inflation and the external deficit is essential to contain the risk that shocks could force an abrupt adjustment in the future. Inflation remains too high, and staff projects that the current account deficit will remain between 5½–6 percent of GDP on current policies. Reflecting in part the large share of short-term external debt, gross external financing requirements will exceed a quarter of GDP per year (Annex II). The net foreign asset position, which has already deteriorated by about 25 percentage points of GDP since 2008, will also weaken further. The current account deficit remains 2½–5 percent of GDP higher than warranted by fundamentals and optimal policy settings. Thus, the estimated real effective exchange rate misalignment is 10–20 percent (Annex III and Box 1). These trends are not sustainable, and if they are not redressed, Turkey could sooner or later suffer a sharp adjustment. Yet, macroeconomic policies have not supported rebalancing by increasing domestic savings, leaving Turkey exposed to shocks. Fiscal and monetary policies have been too loose. Public sector expenditure has grown faster than GDP, and the structural primary balance has deteriorated. The monetary stance has emphasized growth over inflation, and thus has been too loose for too long. Negative real policy interest rates have caused high inflation, thereby eroding competitiveness and reducing incentives for private savings. Real Policy Rates - Average 2009-14 Turkey: Real Policy Rate,2010-14 Brazil Poland Colombia South Africa Source: Haver Analytics. Note: Turkey is the average of 2010-14. Mexico Korea Turkey Source: Haver Analytics. Turkey has benefitted from a supportive international environment for emerging market economies, but the future environment is more uncertain. Over the next year, monetary policy is expected to start normalizing in the United States, which could reduce capital flows to emerging markets. On the other hand, monetary policy in the Euro Area is moving in the opposite direction, and Turkey’s investment grade sovereign credit rating may continue to support capital inflows. The overall environment for capital flows to Turkey is therefore likely to be more mixed going forward. Turkey is in the midst of a long electoral cycle. After winning the local election earlier this year, the Justice and Development Party—in power since 2002—faces parliamentary elections by June 2015. Page 7 Box 1. Turkey’s External Sector In 2013, Turkey’s current account deficit worsened to 7.9 percent of GDP driven by strong private domestic demand and re-stocking of gold. Over the past 5 years, the current account deficit has averaged 6.4 percent of GDP, with large fluctuations in the recent years. Weaker domestic demand conditions and decreased gold imports in 2014 point to another episode of external rebalancing. The deficit is expected to narrow to 5.8 percent of GDP by year-end. Exports to the MENA region moderated. The share of export to the region fell from 32.2 percent of total in 2012 to 27.9 percent in 2013, partly due to diminished gold re-exporting activities. Iraq remains the most important export market in the region, and the second largest export destination for Turkey (after Germany), accounting for 8 percent of total exports. Conflicts in several MENA countries in 2014 are expected to negatively impact Turkey’s trade with the region. And although there are signs that exports to traditional European partners are beginning to pick up, the recovery is expected to be slow due to the region’s subdued economic recovery. Real effective exchange rates (REERs) depreciated in the second half of 2013. CPI- and PPI-based REERs fell by 10 and 9 percent, respectively, compared to end-2012. The REERs continued to depreciate in the first quarter of 2014, but due to high inflation and currency appreciation, have since re-appreciated to levels seen in the 3 rd quarter of 2013. In staff’s view, the overvaluation of the REER is in the 10–20 percent range—consistent with a current account gap of 2½–5 percent of GDP (Annex III). This gap reflects staff’s view that the current account norm for a fast-growing emerging market economy such as Turkey is likely to be higher than the model-estimated -0.9 percent of GDP. At the same time, the gap is larger than in last year’s assessment due to the current account deterioration in 2013. In 2014, slowing domestic demand has lowered the current account deficit, and hence the current account gap. However, as the real effective exchange rate has depreciated just 5 percent compared to the average in 2013, staff continues to see the exchange rate overvaluation in the 10–20 percent range. The REER overvaluation contributes to Turkey’s external competitiveness gap. The positive inflation differentials with trading partners and trade competitors continue to weigh on Turkey’s competitiveness. The recent bout of nominal exchange rate depreciation has helped contain the REER overvaluation, but not enough to outweigh price increases and deliver a sustained competitiveness gain. While the nominal exchange rate has fallen by 13 percent since end-2011, the current CPI- and PPI-based REERs are at about the same levels as at end-2011. Low FDI provides another view on Turkey’s competitiveness challenge. In 2013, Turkey saw a total FDI inflow of 1.6 percent of GDP, below the average of 2.5 percent of GDP for its G-20 emerging-market peers. The share of FDI in the tradable sector, which had been gaining grounds in previous years, receded back to 47 percent of total, on account of greater FDI into financial services. The low FDI into Turkey may partly reflect the trend decline in FDI flows into most emerging markets since 2009. At the same time, Turkey’s high inflation, volatile growth, and structural bottlenecks likely play key roles in impeding FDI Page 8 Box 1. Turkey’s External Sector (concluded) (see “Turkey’s International Competitiveness,” 2013 Selected Issues Paper). The World Economic Forum’s 2014 Global Competitiveness Report gives a low rank to Turkey regarding the reliance on imports (106 th /144), inflation performance (122 nd /144), and labor market efficiency (131 st /144). Turkey also received a relatively low rankings in the quality of both primary (94 th /144) and higher education (89 th /144). Effective Exchange Rates (2003=100) CPI-based Nominal PPI-based Sectors' Share of FDI (percent of total) Agriculture Financial Services FDI ($bn, RHS) Industry Non-Fin. Services Market Share Developments (Turkey's exports in percent of region's imports, 2000=100) Fuel exporting economies E.U. Germany Emerging markets Import Content of Domestic and External Demand (2002=100) Nominal domestic demand plus exports Nominal Imports Sources: Central Bank of Turkey; IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, Turkstat, and IMF staff estimates.