Turkey faces a pressing need to reduce its sizable external imbalances . On the supply side, structural reforms are necessary to boost the private saving rate, increase competitiveness and ultimately raise potential output. But reforms will deliver results only over the medium term. In the meantime, vulnerabilities should be reduced with demand policies, including monetary and fiscal policies, and some prudential measures in the financial sector. The staff’s recommended mix of cyclical and structural policies would ultimately reduce the CAD and stabilize the NIIP . The key items include the following: no sanctionssanctions apply2013201420152016F Trade with Russia in 2013–2016 (US$ billion) Exports to Russia Imports from Russia Sources: CBRT; and IMF staff estimates. Page 19 Structural reforms . Increasing funding of the private pension and the severance pay system would deliver the largest dividend to permanently increase the saving rate. In addition, labor market reforms aimed at increasing participation, in particular of women and refugees, and productivity would increase potential output (Section B below). Tighter monetary policy . A tighter monetary policy would help re-anchor expectations, contain NFC balance sheet effects, and is justifiable in the context of rapidly decreasing global liquidity (Section C below). Higher reserves . The combination of higher reserves—currently at 86 percent of the IMF ARA (Section C below and Annex IV)—and other policies would contribute to a real effective depreciation of the Lira, which staff assesses as moderately over-appreciated (Annex IV). This would improve external competitiveness by adjusting relative prices, which is a much more desirable avenue than externally imposed income compression (Section C below). Tighter fiscal policy . A consolidation of 1.5 percent of GDP over 2016–18 would contribute to rebalancing by increasing aggregate savings (Section D below). The staff’s policy recommendations would lower growth in the short term but increase potential output and stabilize the NIIP in the medium term . Demand management policies recommended by staff would reduce growth by 1-2pps relative to the baseline in the short term. However, these policies would also decrease the probability of a disruptive sudden stop, and, crucially, would reverse the NIIP’s negative trend, and would help bring down inflation to its target. Macro stability would favor savings and investment, Structural reforms promoting savings and productivity would support higher growth in the medium term. The combination of prudent macro policies and structural reforms would ensure sustainable growth with a contained current account deficit.