Capital flow reversal remains the main risk. Shocks to market expectations about monetary policy normalization in advanced economies or changes in expectations about emerging economies’ growth prospects could result in a reduction of capital inflows or, in extremis, even a Page 10 sudden stop. A sharp decrease in inflows would result in a large compression of absorption to close the external deficit and lead to a recession. As imbalances remain large, and the buffers present in the economy are diminishing, the impact could be more pronounced than the 2009 recession (Box 2). In this environment, loose macroeconomic policies to maintain fast growth—which will slow the reduction of the external imbalance and lower credibility—increase risks. And even if the recent gradual adjustment of the external imbalance were to continue, a meaningful reduction in the large external financing needs will take several years, during which vulnerability to volatility in capital flows will remain significant. Other risks center on slower European growth, geopolitical issues, and the strength of the policy framework (Box 3). Lower than anticipated growth in Europe would hurt demand in Turkey’s main export market. The economic spillovers to Turkey from conflicts in Syria and Iraq have negatively impacted exports. The effects of tensions between Ukraine and Russia have thus far been limited, but if they were to lead to generalized risk aversion in financial markets, the impact could become significant. A sharp increase in oil prices would have an immediate pronounced effect on Turkey’s import bill, further widening the external gap. Authorities’ views The authorities agree with staff on the risks, but see them as less likely to materialize and believe buffers are sufficient. In their view, gradual monetary policy normalization in advanced economies is accurately priced in by markets, and any abrupt volatility along the way is likely to be temporary. They point to the sharp 2009 recession and the economic turbulence at the beginning of 2014 to illustrate that the Turkish economy is flexible and has sufficient buffers to cope. The authorities assess the corporate and banking sectors balance sheets as robust. These strengths, combined with a strong public sector position and flexible exchange rate, would in their view allow for an adequate macroeconomic policy response and prevent systemic distress. While slower European growth is a concern, the authorities point out that exports to Europe grew in the first half of 2014, a period when European growth was low too. And even though exports to Iraq have decreased sharply, the authorities expect a rebound in the remainder of the year. Finally, they believe investor sentiment remains favorable towards Turkey, and that the recently announced monetary easing in the Euro Area will be supportive of flows to emerging markets. Page 11 Box 2. The External Imbalance: Buffers and Policy Space The external deficit is expected to remain elevated throughout the forecast horizon. This box discusses the evolution of balance sheets, buffers and policy space since 2008. Balance sheets are more stretched… Vulnerability indicators From 2008 to 2013, current account deficits have weakened the net international investment position. Banks rely more on external funding, which amounted to 18 percent of GDP by the end of 2013 compared to 5½ percent five years earlier. This has not been accompanied by a similar increase in external assets but instead by an increase in domestic credit to the private sector. Banks’ FX exposure has not increased because on-balance sheet open positions are hedged off-balance sheet and because much of the domestic corporate sector credit expansion has been in FX. Non-financial corporates’ FX borrowing from banks increased to 18 percent of GDP in 2013 from around 5 percent in 2008 with a corresponding increase in non-financial corporates’ net open FX position. Households continue to hold more FX assets than liabilities as FX lending to household is prohibited. …buffers remain but are smaller… Banks, corporates, and households have become more leveraged. Corporates have less equity to absorb potential losses from currency depreciation, to which they are increasingly exposed. Banks’ direct FX exposure is limited but indirect exposure has risen through credit risk from their FX lending to non-financial corporates. At the same time, their capital buffers have declined since 2008, although they remain well-above the regulatory minimum. Household leverage has increased to over 50 percent of disposable income, due to high consumer credit growth. …and policy space is more limited than in 2008. While gross international reserves have increased from 2008 to 2013, this is due to banks’ FX reserves. Net FX reserves (those directly available for intervention) have declined. Also, with a negative real policy rate there is no monetary policy space compared to 2008 when the real rate was around 6½ percent. However, even though the structural fiscal position has deteriorated, there is fiscal space as government debt is low at around 36 percent of GDP, an improvement since 2008. NIIP (% of GDP) Banks' external liabilites (% of GDP) Loans/Deposits Ratio NFC FX liabilities from banks (% of GDP) NFC net open FX position (% of GDP) Households' net FX asset positions (% of GDP) Buffers Banks' Capital Adequacy Ratio (% of RWAs) Banks' Liquid Assets (% of total assets) Corporate Equity (% of total assets) HH Leverage (% of disp. income) Policy Space Net Gross CBRT reserves (% of ST debt) Real Effective Policy Rate (difference from US) Government Debt (% of GDP) Note: Orange (green) indicates increased (reduced) vulnerability. Page 12 Box 3. Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Likelihood Impact Side-effects from global financial conditions: An abrupt surge in global financial market and capital flow volatility , as investors reassess underlying risk − possibly triggered by revised market expectations on UMP exit − , sharply deteriorating Turkey’s external financing outlook. Protracted period of slower growth in Europe: Lower-than-anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address legacies of the financial crisis, leading to secular stagnation, and hurting demand for Turkish exports. High High High Medium Reduced policy credibility leading to: High inflation and a deteriorating fiscal position erode confidence and lead to re-dollarization. High High Policy Response Implement tighter monetary policy.  Use FX reserves to smooth volatility.  Short-run: Contain imports through domestic demand management. Medium term: Diversify export destinations and improve competitiveness, thus boosting exports.  Short-run: Tighten monetary policy and normalize the framework. Tightening above and beyond what was originally called for might be necessary. Medium term: Tighten fiscal policy with an emphasis on expenditure compression. Regional geopolitical risks: Sustained geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia/Ukraine that heighten risk aversion and create disturbances in global financial, trade and commodity markets. Heightened risk of fragmentation and state failure in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices.  Short-run: Increase FX reserves through sterilized intervention. Medium term: Improve competitiveness through structural reform. Reduce energy dependence by developing additional domestic generation capacity. Medium Medium Medium Medium The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 13