Staff advised further strengthening of supervision and bank governance, building on the enhanced legal framework for financial regulation. Banks face rising credit risks in the In contrast to existing schemes that provide incentives to investments that satisfy predetermined conditions, the new scheme enables the cabinet to grant a broad spectrum of incentives to specific projects on an ad-hoc fashion. pu Page 17 downward phase of the economic cycle. The share of non-performing loans has increased in consumer and more recently corporate loans. Restructuring of credits to sectors hit hardest by the economic slowdown masks the extent of asset quality impairment. Drawing upon the findings of the recent FSAP assessment (Box 5), staff urged authorities to evaluate and revise the definition of credit classifications to bring them more in line with international norms and strengthen enforcement, and to strengthen the supervisory processes and banks’ governance standards. Staff questioned the rationale behind the recent loosening of macroprudential regulations for consumer loans. Macroprudential policies should focus squarely on ensuring the soundness of the financial system—not on active domestic demand management. Staff argued that the macroprudential loosening risks being counterproductive in the context of high private indebtedness. Even if it is temporarily successful in spurring demand, it adds to existing financial vulnerabilities that policies would need to address in the future. Staff argued that the macroprudential regime for corporate FX borrowing should aim at lowering the foreign exchange risk in the economy. Specific measures in this area, drawn from the recent FSAP assessment, are manifold: (i) quicker phase-in of reserve requirement measures aimed at lengthening the maturity of banks’ external financing as well as the net stable funding ratio; (ii) increasing the remuneration differential between Lira and FX reserves to further slow banks’ FX wholesale borrowing; (iii) increasing capital charges and/or provisioning on FX loans aimed at internalizing the increased indirect credit risk associated with FX lending; (iv) bringing the prudential treatment of FX-indexed lending in line with that of FX lending; and (v) introducing tax measures to discourage NFCs from borrowing in FX, both domestically and externally. Turkey continues to make progress toward implementing international standards for anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism. Staff encouraged the authorities to implement the FSAP recommendations in the area (Box 5). Authorities’ views The authorities see the loosening of macroprudential measures for consumer lending as stabilizing domestic demand and thereby lowering financial sector risks. While aware of the challenges stemming from the corporate sector’s elevated negative FX position, the authorities maintain that relaxation in macroprudential measures will help recovery in credit growth, which has been subdued for three years.