MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS A cyclical rebalancing is underway. Growth decelerated to 2.7 percent (annualized) in the first half of 2014, driven by public sector spending and net exports, as private consumption and investment weakened. Monetary policy tightening in response to exchange rate pressure in the first quarter, macroprudential measures to cool credit growth, and exchange rate depreciation weakened private domestic demand, thus compressing import growth and reducing the current account Page 9 deficit. But the smaller external deficit is mostly due to cyclical factors and the one-off effect of net gold imports. Staff expects GDP to grow by 3 percent in both 2014 and 2015. Monetary easing since April and concomitantly easier financing conditions should produce a modest rebound of private domestic demand in the second half of 2014. In addition, public spending is expected to remain supportive of growth. Net exports and the public sector are likely to contribute each about 1½ percentage points to GDP growth this year. In 2015, on current policies, growth will remain at around 3 percent, with a larger domestic demand contribution (including a sizeable contribution by the public sector) and negative net exports. However, private investment is expected to remain subdued until the end of the long electoral cycle. However imbalances remain significant. The premature monetary easing, which has left a negative real policy interest rates, pass-through from the lira depreciation, and food price inflation, is expected to leave inflation at 9 percent at year-end, well above the 5 percent inflation target. And, on unchanged policies, inflation is not expected to return to target next year either. Moreover, as GDP once again rotates towards domestic demand in 2015, the current account deficit is projected to widen to 6 percent of GDP in 2015, from 5¾ percent in 2014 based on an oil price assumption of US$99.4 per barrel. Without a change in policies, medium-term economic performance is likely to be weaker than in the recent past. Turkey’s low domestic savings and challenges related to competitiveness are limiting investment and exports. Thus, on current policies and national saving rates, staff has revised annual medium-term growth to about 3½ percent. The lower growth rate is expected to contain inflation and the deterioration of the current account, although both will remain elevated at about 6 percent. As such, while vulnerabilities are not envisaged to grow, the baseline assumes a continued willingness of investors to finance a large external deficit. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly share staff’s outlook. They recognize downside risks to their original official growth forecast for 2014, and that inflation is likely to exceed their objective. For 2015, however, the authorities see an acceleration of growth to around 4 percent, as they expect domestic demand to play a larger role. They believe the real exchange rate is close to equilibrium and judge that the improvement in the external balance will continue with increased net exports. The authorities acknowledge that, in the medium term, rebalancing the economy towards investment and exports is necessary to avoid a decline in trend growth. However, they believe their reform program will be sufficient to achieve this objective.