Growth is projected to be below potential in 2016–18. Domestic political turmoil, uncertain future of the EU-Turkey relations, tensions in the South-East regions, and military involvement in neighboring countries are expected to weigh in on domestic demand. However, population growth and rising wages will support consumption, while macroprudential loosening and fiscal incentives will benefit investment. Bank credit to the private sector is expected to remain subdued and, hence, not to be a significant factor in the growth recovery. Net exports are expected to improve somewhat, as a result of the Lira depreciation, the domestic demand retrenchment, and the expected lifting of Russian sanctions but security concerns are likely to hold back the full recovery in tourist arrivals. Uncertainty and changing global financing conditions are expected keep the cost of external borrowing elevated. As a result, short-term growth prospects have worsened considerably. Over the medium-term, growth is projected to be at around 3.5 percent, unchanged from previous estimates, but internal and external imbalances are expected to persist, with inflation remaining well above target and external debt rising. On balance, the risks to the medium-term baseline are tilted to the downside (Annex I): On the upside, increased trade with Iran and a stronger than expected recovery in the EU could help reduce external imbalances. Prompt implementation of planned structural reforms may yield better results earlier than currently envisaged. Downside risks relate to the high exposure to FX risk of non-financial corporations, large annual external financing needs against the backdrop of low net international reserves (NIR), the sizeable short-term capital inflows, and the expected further widening of the negative In part driven by the 2016 minimum wage hike and planned indexation in 2017, reflecting the role of the minimum wage as a benchmark in wage negotiations. Reflecting the weak outlook for productivity growth; tight lending standards amid the deterioration in bank loan quality; high interest rates due in part to scarcity of domestic savings; and the Lira depreciation, which exacerbated the burden of corporate FX-denominated debts. IMF Country Report No. 16/105. Those estimates also highlight that potential growth will decrease if recovery in TFP growth fails to materialize or investment continues to be weak. While the largest firms seem relatively resilient to both FX and interest rate shocks, the performance of second-tier firms (between top 20–100 largest firms) is noticeably weaker given their weak starting positions and lack of hedges against currency depreciation (Turkey 2016 FSSA). The consequent deterioration in corporate credit quality from these second tier firms under the stress scenarios is rapid and significant. Page 14 NIIP. These weaknesses could exacerbate the negative effects of a possible increase in the cost of external financing caused, for instance, by rapid interest rate increases by the U.S. Federal Reserve or a generalized increase in global risk premia. Deleveraging could accelerate, leading to a credit-income contraction cycle and ultimately to a recession. A possible further deterioration in geopolitical relations could undermine investor confidence. Authorities’ views The authorities believe growth will recover strongly in 2017. They attribute the economic slowing primarily to the drop in tourism, which shaved more than 1 percentage point off growth in 2016. However, thanks to a relaxation in macroprudential measures, a reduction in domestic interest rates, and investment stimulus packages, consumption and investment is expected to recover in 2017. Improved relations with Russia and growth in traditional trading partners will help the recovery of tourism and exports. With the help of political stability and structural reforms, they expect Turkey to perform strongly. The Medium-Term Program projects growth at 4.4 percent in 2017 and 5.0 percent in 2018.