Staff welcomed the adjustment of the monetary stance and framework in January The CBRT’s increase in interest rates and move towards normalization of the monetary framework effectively contained the fallout from heightened domestic uncertainty and financial market volatility. The episode thus underscored the role that a clear framework and appropriate stance can play in preventing turbulence. Turkey: Policy Rate Differentials (percentage points) Turkey - Euro Area Turkey - US Sources: CBRT, ECB, FED. But the credibility gap resurfaced in the spring. In particular, monetary policy loosening starting in May was premature in staff’s view, as inflation was close to double-digits and inflation expectations were deteriorating. This has resulted in a monetary stance that is inconsistent with the authorities’ inflation target and by most measures opened a significant credibility gap (Box 6). In addition, by limiting liquidity provision at the policy rate—in order to be able to drive funding costs above the policy rate—the CBRT has once again moved the framework away from a conventional setup. Turkey: Dollarization Trends Staff argued for a tighter monetary policy stance. With year-end inflation expectations at 9 percent, partly driven by high food inflation, the policy rate remains negative in real terms. This stance is not consistent with the inflation target in an economy with a negligible output gap and Residents FX deposits (bilion of USD; lhs) Residents FX deposits (percent of M2; rhs) Source: CBRT. The difference between year-end CPI inflation expectations and the inflation target. See Selected Issues Papers for details. Page 18 Inflation Targets and Outturns (in % yoy) Upper band Outturn Lower band Target Turkey: Foreign Exchange Deposits Residents FX deposits (bilion of USD; lhs) Residents FX deposits (percent of M2; rhs) Credibility of inflation target - 2014-16 Source: CBRT. E( π ) 2014 min E( π ) 2015 target π E( π ) 2016 max Box 6. The Credibility Gap Between 2006 and 2013, the inflation target was met only twice . This was in part due to the unorthodox framework with which the CBRT provided liquidity to banks at multiple rates and with multiple instruments, rather than using only the key policy rate. This hampers market’s ability to gauge the reaction function of the CBRT. It is also due to the high exchange rate pass through that generates inflation volatility in periods of less favorable capital inflows. As a result, inflation expectations are poorly anchored and the monetary transmission mechanism has been undermined. Markets do not expect the CBRT to meet the inflation target in the medium term . Inflation expectation surveys and various tests of market implied inflation expectations (see selected issues paper) suggest that inflation outturn in the medium term is likely to be in the upper region of or even beyond the 200 bps band around the inflation target. credit growth running at 18 percent. Missing the inflation target in the last three out of four years, with outcomes above the top end of the +/-200bps band around the target, has led to a significant deterioration in the capacity for the CBRT to anchor inflation expectations in the face of transitory price shocks. Thus, staff called for an increase in the policy interest rate to reach a positive real level, which should be sustained to bring both inflation and expectations to target. The rate increase would serve as an important signal that the central bank prioritizes inflation, and would aid in the resumption of the de-dollarization trend of the economy. In addition, staff called for full normalization of the monetary policy framework. Normalizing the framework by committing to providing full liquidity at the policy rate would facilitate communication and help improve monetary transmission. Together with the advocated rate increase it would serve the CBRT’s credibility. Page 19 Staff also advised the authorities to accumulate more foreign exchange reserves over time, as market conditions allow. January’s intervention and the CBRT’s regular FX sales have eroded net international reserves. While gross reserves of US$135 billion account for about 117 percent of the Fund’s metric in mid-2014 and appear reasonable by this metric, they are not as ample as those of peer countries. In addition, much of these reserves are commercial bank FX deposits related to the reserve option mechanism (ROM) and FX reserve requirements. As such, the ROM FX deposits in particular may not be available to the central bank in times of stress. Adjusting for this item, the CBRT’s international reserves stand at about 95 percent of the Fund’s ARA metric. Net international reserves directly under the control of the CBRT stand at a much lower US$41 billion. Given Turkey’s external financing needs, this level of net international reserves is too low for the CBRT to credibly intervene during times of high exchange rate volatility. Therefore, the CBRT should gradually increase net international reserves, as market circumstances permit. Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMF Financial Soundness Indicators . 1/ With and without ROM FX. Figure [X]. Reserve Adequacy in Turkey and Peer Countries Indonesia S. Africa Turkey 1/ Mexico (percent of ARA metric) Poland Hungary Russia India China Brazil Authorities’ views The central bank believes it reacted well to turbulence in January. The interest rate hike served to quickly restore confidence, and stabilized the exchange rate. Moreover, the simplification of the monetary framework helped their communication strategy. In addition, they point to the change in the upward trend in resident foreign exchange deposits as a sign that their decision restored credibility. The CBRT sees high inflation as being due to idiosyncratic shocks, and expects headline inflation to decline given what they felt was a tight monetary stance. They explain the current high headline inflation by the drought that has resulted in high food inflation (a major component of the CPI basket), and the exchange rate pass through to inflation. While they acknowledge some deterioration in pricing behavior, they judge economic conditions as supportive of disinflation with no demand push to prices and a negative and widening output gap. In addition, they look at overall financial conditions taking into consideration monetary policy and the impact of macroprudential policies implemented by the bank regulator (BRSA) to slow consumer lending. Taken together, they The adjustment comprises deducting the amount of FX (but not gold) reserves related to ROM from both the numerator and the denominator of the metric, as ROM deposits consist of FX that can be converted to Lira at the discretion of the commercial banks. Excluding government FX deposits. Page 20 believe overall set of policies are restrictive for the real economy and that this will help bring inflation to target. Moreover, they expect that product market reforms to limit food inflation will contribute to disinflation over the medium term. Finally, the central bank deems the pace of accumulation of international reserves appropriate. They explained the stock of reserves would suffice to withstand balance of payments stresses akin to those experienced in the recent past. While they see a need for higher net reserves, they are satisfied with the pace of accumulation through EXIM bank loans.