In 2015, growth displayed resilience despite several shocks with monetary policy insufficiently tight (see Section C below) and fiscal policy neutral (see Section D below). Political uncertainty. Two parliamentary elections, the war in Syria, escalating tensions with Russia, resumption of the armed conflict in the South East, and terrorist attacks generated security and political uncertainty, undermining consumer confidence and investors’ risk appetite. Page 9 Weak investment and declining profitability . In line with other emerging markets, investment has been lagging, even as investment was strong in 2015Q2. Moreover, the tighter external and domestic financing conditions, the increasing burden of corporate debt in foreign exchange (FX), and the consequent decreasing profitability compounded by increasing real unit labor costs (ULCs), have been taking a toll on investment. Capital outflows have put pressure on the Lira. The large Lira depreciation increased the burden of FX debt for the non financial corporate (NFC) market, now standing at a gross US$291 billion, or US$184 billion on a net basis. Non-exporting entities were particularly affected (see IMF 2016b) and this contributed to low private investment. Depressed external demand . While demand from the EU registered some marginal pick up, oil exporting trade partners were hit by a sharp fall of fuel prices. Hence, the contribution of net exports to real growth remained negative (see paragraph 8 below). Yet, several factors have made the economy more resilient to shocks Turkey has been one of the countries that benefitted the most from the low international oil prices in 2015. The lira depreciation increased the competitiveness of exporting firms. In addition, it improved households’ net wealth, in lira terms, as households have net FX assets amounting to around 14 percent of GDP in September 2015. Corporate profit remains high, despite the long-term downward trend. Page 10 Moreover, companies have long FX positions over the short term, thanks to sizable FX deposits, and more than half of NFCs’ external debt has maturity of more than 3 years. Still, growth is below both the historical average and the authorities’ long-term target. Economic growth is lower than the 5 percent 2002–15 average and authorities’ announced 5 percent target due to ever decreasing contribution of investment and negative contribution of net exports. Potential growth is also slowing . With both capital and labor growing strongly on average from 2006–14, the slowdown in potential output growth is due to stagnant total factor productivity (TFP) growth (Box 1 and IMF 2016b). Box 1. Turkey: Potential Output in Turkey Potential output growth started to decline in 2006, dropped further going into the global financial crisis, and has since remained low—mainly as a result of lower potential TFP growth . The decline in TFP was partially offset by capital accumulation and an increase in labor force participation from 46 percent in 2007 to 50 percent in 2013, thanks to a 7 percentage point increase in female labor force participation and the female employment rate (IMF 2016b). Potential output growth is expected to average 3–3½ percent from 2015–20 under current policies. Labor force growth is expected to contribute ½–1 percent to potential output growth. Capital stock growth is expected to contribute about 2 percent to potential output. With about 2½–3 percent contribution from capital and labor, potential TFP growth of ½–1 percent is necessary for Turkey to achieve a potential output growth of 3–3½ percent going forward. This is a significant increase from the negative growth rates after the global financial crisis but less than during the first half of the 2000s. The employment rate is low, especially among women . The employment rate (at about 46 percent) remains much lower than the OECD average. The low female labor force participation and low retirement age are among the factors behind low employment levels. At an estimated 10.2 percent, the unemployment rate remains high, in part due to the rigid labor market rules (including a high labor tax wedge and high firing costs) and educational mismatches. Moreover, Page 11 absorbing the over 2.5 million refugees—who have been recently granted work permits—is a further challenge, as they may compete directly for employment with lower-skilled women. Inflation remains high. Both headline and core inflation came out at 9.6 percent in January 2016, well-above the 5 percent target, partly due to exchange rate pass-through. Consequently, expectations remain poorly anchored; with end-year headline inflation expectations increasing from 7 to more than 8 percent in 2015. At the same time, external vulnerabilities remain high The current account deficit remains large despite lower fuel imports and the 2015 depreciation. The 2015 CAD is estimated to have improved to 4.4 percent of GDP due to lower energy prices. However, the trade balance excluding gold and fuel deteriorated. Export revenues fell because of weak growth in trading partners and increasing ULCs. The real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated by only 6.9 percent because high domestic inflation offset much off the nominal depreciation of the Lira. Overall, the economy’s external position remains moderately weaker than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Annex IV). Core-I inflation excludes energy, food, nonalcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, and gold. Page 12 The quality of external financing is a concern. The maturity of bank loans increased after a change in reserve requirement rules (Section E below and Annex IV). However, the financial account balance (excluding reserves) shrunk to about 2 percent of GDP in 2015 with net portfolio flows turning negative. Net FDIs remain low, net errors and omissions are large and volatile, and the CBRT has used its international reserves to finance part of the CAD. The large negative NIIP contributes to the CAD through increasing interest payments . Turkey’s NIIP reached -50 percent of GDP in 2015 supported by favorable valuation effects (Box 2) with FDI and equity portfolio shrinking while debt portfolio increasing. By 2021, the NIIP is projected to deteriorate to -60 percent of GDP. Debt service payments are large, simply due to the sheer size of the NIIP, and are projected to increase given the large share of debt with short maturities and variable interest rates, and increasing international rates. Page 13 A large external debt with high external financing. The external debt increased to 56 percent of GDP in 2015 with banks continuing to leverage up in wholesale FX financing. While the debt repayment profile over the next 12 months is broadly smooth, about one third of external debt is short-term, and financing needs remain above 25 percent of GDP over the projection horizon (Annex IV). Page 14 Box 2. Turkey: Net international Investment Position Valuation Effects Turkey’s persistent current account deficits led to the accumulation of one of the largest negative NIIP among emerging markets, in excess of about -50 percent of GDP. During 2000–15, foreign liabilities, consisting of mainly debt, at the expense of FDI and other equity investment, increased from 57 to 83 percent of GDP and exceeded US$600 billion. Over the same period, foreign assets grew from 20 to 33 percent of GDP (to about US$227 billion). In the last few years, however, the total change in the NIIP fell short of the cumulative CAD by a large margin. In 2010–14 the difference between the sum of current account deficits and the change in the level of NIIP was US$109 billion. This means that absent favorable effects from valuation and other factors, NIIP would stand close -70 percent of GDP in 2015. Part of the difference was driven by introduction of the Reserve Option Mechanism (ROM) in 2011. Banks were allowed to meet their reserve requirements on lira-denominated liabilities by using foreign exchange and gold. By the end of 2014, the use of ROM in gold reached about US$16 billion. These gold holdings became part of the CBRT’s gross reserves and were reflected in the countries’ foreign assets. The remaining portion of the mismatch between the dynamic of the CAD and the NIIP is explained by an increasing role of net errors and omissions (NEO) and favorable valuation effects. In 2010–14 the net value of BoP transactions captured by the NEO term exceeded US$9.9 billion. While the nature of NEO is mixed, CBRT believes that this item, to a large extent, represents savings abroad. Finally, by 2010, the combined share of foreign equity investments and debt denominated in Turkish lira reached 57 percent of the total stock of liabilities. This helped to limit the growth of foreign liabilities during Lira depreciation. At the same time, FDI and portfolio flows, items that are most sensitive to price and FX changes, constitute a larger share of gross liabilities than assets. Hence, changes on the liabilities side dominate the dynamics of the NIIP for a given size of stock. The cumulative impact of the aggregated ‘valuation’ changes over 2010–14 is estimated at about 10 percent of 2014 GDP. Valuation effects supported a modest NIIP improvement in 2015 to about -50 percent of GDP . Apart from the CBRT, in the beginning of 2015 Turkey was short in USD, euro, and Turkish Lira. In 2015, the Turkish Lira depreciated 21 percent against the US dollars and 6 percent against the EUR, improving the NIIP in USD terms. Overall, the effect of FX and other changes on the NIIP value in US dollars was in the order of US$90 billion, which is significantly larger than valuation effects registered in previous years. Central BankGeneral Government BanksOther Sectors TotalNet IIP126.6-118.3-187.3-261.7-440.6 USD 1/1.7-35.9-88.0-62.9 EURO 1/-2.4-23.4-57.2-114.8 TYR-52.2-34.0-56.8 Other, incl. SDR1.4-6.7-8.2-27.2 Reserves assets, excl. SDR 2/125.9 Sources: CBRT; and IMF staff calculations.Notes: 1/ Other than reserve assets. 2/ Including monetary gold, currency composition is not available. Turkey: IIP Currency Composition, end 2014 (Negative values indicate negative NIIP, US$ equivalent, US$ billion) Page 15 A low private saving rate is the primary cause of external vulnerabilities . Many factors contribute to the low private saving rate: (i) the expansion of safety nets and rapid urbanization, lowering precautionary savings; (ii) possibly financial deepening (which empirically typically has an ambiguous impact on saving); and (iii) low international real interest rates which are still providing cheap FX financing. For 2015, even the low (by peer country standard) private investment rate of 16 percent generates a private sector saving-investment gap of -3.8 percent of GDP. In contrast, the public saving-investment gap is around -0.5 percent, supported by an overall prudent fiscal policy. Buffers in the economy have decreased . In the private sector, the profitability of non-bank corporates and the capital adequacy and profitability of banks have all decreased. In the public sector, fiscal buffers remain high as a primary surplus and trend real GDP growth above the real interest rate imply that the debt to GDP ratio continues to decline gradually (Annex III). Finally, the CBRT has been intervening in the market through auctions and direct sales of net reserves to importing SOEs. Therefore, Gross International Reserves (GIRs) have declined and fell below 90 percent of the IMF assessment of reserve adequacy (ARA) metric (Annex IV).