Partnerships ADB has been working with Tuvalu since 1993 and has approved 3 loans totaling $7.8 million, 4 program grants totaling $9.59 million, and over 22 technical assistance projects totaling $7.72 million, largely supporting public sector management, education, and maritime transport sectors. Cumulative disbursements to Tuvalu for lending and grants, financed by ordinary capital resources, the Asian Development Fund, and other special funds amount to $15.5 million. ADB’s approach and operations in Tuvalu are aligned to Tuvalu’s eighth national development plan, the National Strategy for Sustainable Development (Te Kakeega III), 2016–2020. ADB’s operational focus over the medium term supports the Te Kakeega III’s cross-cutting objectives of Infrastructure and Support Services; the Economy, Growth and Stability; Environment, and Climate Change. These strategic priorities are in line with ADB’s corporate strategy 2020. ADB, together with development partners, remain committed to supporting government’s roadmap for improving the management of public resources, exercising prudent public expenditure and fiscal management, strengthening corporate governance, and delivering better public services to the people of Tuvalu. ADB participates as a team member of the International Monetary Fund Article IV Mission to Tuvalu, and liaises closely with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre—particularly on macroeconomic management and fiscal conditions. ADB observes the biannual meetings of the Tuvalu Trust Fund Board and cooperates with civil society organizations in Tuvalu to strengthen the effectiveness, quality, and sustainability of its services. ADB is also committed to undertaking joint missions with development partners to improve coordination and lessen demands on country capacity. ADB Supported Projects and Programs The government embarked on a comprehensive reform program from 2012 to 2015 implemented through technical assistance and a coordinated program of flexible budget support grants provided by ADB, the governments of Australia and New Zealand, and the World Bank. Collaborative efforts towards improved governance, social development, education and human resources, and macroeconomic growth and stability helped mitigate the social and economic impact of the global financial crisis and strengthened Tuvalu’s fiscal sustainability against future shocks. ADB provided grants in 2008, 2012, and 2015, totaling $7.6 million, towards sound macroeconomic and fiscal management and improved public enterprise performances. The latest grant of $2.0 million, approved in September 2015, completed the final set of reforms begun with ADB support in Page 59 2012. Public procurement reforms supported by ADB have resulted in competition among suppliers, cost-savings, transparent procurement proceedings, and improved public confidence in the use of public finances. Reforms to contract out selected construction works currently undertaken by the Public Works Department and privatize the government-owned hotel will help reduce the drain from ad hoc government subsidies on the national budget, attract greater private sector participation, and generate employment. Improvements to the management and maintenance of government’s fiscal buffer fund will help ensure long-term macroeconomic stability and economic self-sufficiency. ADB approved preparatory work in July 2015 for the proposed Outer Island Maritime Infrastructure Project, which will rehabilitate and improve maritime infrastructure in selected outer islands of Tuvalu; and improve safety, efficiency, and sustainability of maritime transportation between Funafuti and the eight outer islands. This investment project, likely to cost around $25 million, is expected to be approved in late 2016. ADB technical assistance has supported public financial management, governance, education, and capacity development in Tuvalu. Tuvalu also benefitted from regional technical assistance in economic management, audit capacity, aviation safety, private sector development, infrastructure planning, climate change, and safeguards. Future Directions The introduction of a base annual allocation of $3.0 million for small developing member countries from January 2015, which will double to $6.0 million in 2017, has boosted ADB’s scope for investment opportunities in Tuvalu. In mid-March 2015, tropical cyclone Pam caused significant damage to agriculture and infrastructure, estimated at over $15.0 million. The government is seeking contributions from development partners for prioritized interventions in the Tuvalu Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction Plan, which requires over $70.0 million to implement. Towards this objective, ADB will seek approval for the proposed Outer Island Maritime Infrastructure Project in 2016. Over the medium term, ADB’s focus on the transport sector and strengthening public sector management will help improve the efficiency and safety of outer island transportation through upgraded port facilities and help sustain good fiscal management. Regional approaches to information and communication technology, disaster risk management, and climate change will be explored. Page 60