Given substantial vulnerabilities in the banking sector, there is an urgent need to establish a framework of banking supervision and resolution . The NBT’s financial risk appears under control given the sound profitability as indicated by a return on assets of around 3 percent and comfortable capital equivalent to 24 percent of total assets, although these need to be verified under a prudent regulatory framework. The rapid deterioration of the DBT’s financial position points to a looming solvency issue. This would imply spillover risks across the banking system, which may be limited by the DBT’s small market share and relatively simple financial linkages, and perhaps more importantly, result in large government liabilities: the budget would need to allocate resources to repay the bank’s borrowing guaranteed by the government (1.4 percent of GDP). Moreover, fresh capital may eventually need to be injected into the banking system should an assessment based on prudent standards suggest—given the underdeveloped private sector and its limited financial capacity as well as the unsuccessful experience of privatizing public enterprises, introducing private capital could be challenging, and resorting to budget resources would still be likely. Going forward, the priority is to implement a banking supervisory and regulatory framework—in particular, a Bank Commission needs to be established and supervisors employed as soon as feasible with due regard to controlling administrative costs. Given Tuvalu’s limited capacity and the need for arm’s-length supervision, development partners’ support for this initiative will be crucial. The financial condition of the banking sector and its implications for the economy, e.g. the cost of a possible The mission suggested that the authorities contact the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) for technical assistance as soon as feasible. Page 11 recapitalization, should be assessed urgently on the basis of prudential standards, and a banking resolution framework needs to be set up. The authorities are cognizant of the need to strengthen the banking sector. They are considering establishing the Bank Commission as stipulated by the law, and agreed with staff’s views on the need to strengthen the banking sector, albeit with more focus on expanding banking services.