Tuvalu is one of the smallest and most isolated countries in the world . With a population of some 11,000 people living on 26 square kilometers, Tuvalu is more than 3,000 kilometers away from its nearest major external market (New Zealand). The country faces tremendous challenges stemming from its remoteness, lack of scale economies, weak institutional capacity, and, above all, climate change and rising sea levels, which threaten the country’s very existence. (Appendix III) Income is relatively high, but the economy is fragile. Fishing revenues and foreign aid, as well as remittances, have significantly raised living standards—absolute poverty is rare, access to primary education is effectively universal, and per capita income is among the highest in the group of small Pacific island countries. Nevertheless, fishing revenues and foreign aid are highly volatile and uncertain (Appendix IV), and could experience a secular decline over the medium to long run, while remittances have not recovered to the level prevailing before the global financial crisis mainly as a result of limited human capacity, pointing to weak competitiveness (Appendix V). The authorities have limited policy space to maneuver—fiscal policy is the only macro policy lever given the use of the Australian dollar as the legal currency; there is little scope for diversifying the small economy that is dominated by inefficient public enterprises; and the lending capacity of banks is constrained by severe asset quality problems. These factors make it all the more important to develop a sound fiscal policy framework, address weaknesses in banks and public enterprises, and foster a favorable business environment for the private sector. Tuvalu holds large assets abroad and also owes substantial debt. The Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF), originally capitalized by development partners in 1987, aims to provide additional funding for budget support. Holdings are global, but Australian assets are weighted heavily. The TTF is not fully sovereign and cannot be drawn down freely: when its market value exceeds a “maintained value” indexed to Australian CPI, the TTF Board—representing both development partners and Tuvalu government—can decide to transfer the excess to the budget. TTF’s market value dropped markedly during the global financial crisis, but has since recovered steadily to more than $A 140 million (3.5 times of GDP). The Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF) serves as a fiscal buffer and deposit account for development partners’ grants, and can be drawn down freely at the authorities’ discretion. Thanks to large fiscal surpluses achieved in the past two years, CIF has been built up to more than $A 15 million (38 percent of GDP). Meanwhile, Tuvalu’s public debt has reached 41 percent of GDP by end-2013, with external debt—including public enterprise debt on commercial terms— accounting for 35 percent of GDP. The debt is projected to rise sharply to 56.9 percent in 2014 on account of a new loan agreement taken on by a fishing joint venture to finance the expansion of its fishing capacity—the loan could, as usual, be guaranteed by the government. The authorities are cognizant of the challenges and have developed a broad reform agenda . A policy reform matrix (PRM), formulated in consultation with development partners, has been fleshed out in an effort to enhance governance and social development, facilitate private sector growth, and safeguard macroeconomic stability. (Appendix II) Significant progress has been Page 5 made in the first two phases of the PRM to enhance public financial management, while measures undertaken to rationalize social spending and strengthen public enterprises have witnessed limited success. The authorities are designing the third phase of PRM in close consultation with development partners. Tuvalu has entered into an electoral cycle. The general elections are expected to be held by March 2015.