Near-term risks mainly stem from banking sector vulnerabilities, while fiscal sustainability remains a major concern over the medium to long run . Several infrastructure projects financed by grants from development partners (amounting to more than 40 percent of GDP) are expected to come on stream in the next three years, and may boost growth to 2.5 percent, while weak capacity and competitiveness will continue to impede growth over the long run. Macroeconomic and financial risks are elevated. In the near term, the impaired balance sheet of the DBT could further weaken its lending capacity, constitute a drag on growth in the private sector, and, more importantly, threaten macro-financial stability and undermine business confidence. Over the medium to long run, maintaining fiscal sustainability remains the most important challenge—the debt sustainability analysis suggests a high risk of debt distress under the baseline; fishing revenues are highly uncertain and face downside risks; and contingent liabilities, mostly associated with state- owned banks and public enterprises, are substantial. The external account may deteriorate over time . The large inflows of foreign grants would be offset by rising imports as a result of increased budget spending and public investment. With the depletion of the CIF, foreign exchange reserves are projected to decline from 9 months of The spending on these large projects would be extrabudgetary. Page 7 imports to 5 months over the medium term. The balance of payments is subject to significant risks. Fishing license fees will likely remain buoyant over the medium term, but may decline over the long run because of climate change and overfishing. Remittances by seafarers and seasonal workers might weaken if the risk of protracted slower growth in advanced and emerging economies materializes or China’s economy further slows, affecting growth and job opportunities in the Pacific region. The impact of U.S. tapering is uncertain—the tapering could cause the Australian dollar to further depreciate and improve Tuvalu’s competitiveness, but a disorderly tapering may increase volatility in Australia’s asset markets where the TTF is invested, generating fluctuations in the TTF’s market value and likely transfers to Tuvalu’s budget. The authorities generally agreed with the staff’s views on the economic outlook . They indicated that the weak growth may result from a lack of large projects, and expect growth to pick up in the next few years as several large projects start to be implemented. They also anticipated balance of payments pressure in light of the uncertainty in fishing-related receipts.