Background Tuvalu's strong fishing and .tv revenues during the past 3 years have allowed it to overcome some of the difficulties created by the earlier global financial crisis. The short-term outlook appears stable on the back of continued favorable fishing and .tv revenues as well as large donor- financed investments, but vulnerabilities in the state owned enterprises and financial sector continue to pose challenges to macro stability. PFTAC Technical Assistance (TA) has been moderate and concentrated in the revenue and statistics sectors. Recent PFTAC TA has been focused on assisting the authorities achieve the gains planned from revenue reforms through on-the-job assistance in revenue administration following the completion of an ADB project that supported the PFTAC-designed reforms. There has also been significant assistance in developing national accounts and balance of payments statistics, in part to allow Tuvalu to meet the requirements of IMF membership. PFTAC provided TA in 2012 to develop a PFM Reform Roadmap. Strategy 2012-2016 PFTAC’s TA strategy is guided by the APD regional strategy note and is planned within the results framework for the current PFTAC funding cycle. PFTAC TA aims to support the authorities sustain progress on improving fiscal sustainability. PFTAC will continue to work closely with the broader development partner group to ensure coherence and will aim to support implementation of actions in the authorities’ shared policy matrix. Public Financial Management area, PFTAC provided support in 2012 to develop a PFM roadmap to prioritize the strengthening of PFM weaknesses identified in the 2011 PEFA ( ). Support to implementation of specific elements will also be available, in coordination with other development partners and in particular the Australian Agency for International Development or AusAID -supported budget and treasury advisors. In 2014 PFTAC provided TA to rewrite Tuvalu's Financial Instructions, and worked with Ministry of Finance officials in 2015 to conduct a PEFA Self- Assessment and revise their 2011 Roadmap. The Self-Assessment identified many improvements since the 2011 PEFA. Officials from Tuvalu have regularly attended PFTAC’s PFM workshops including the most recently delivered (with PFTAC's Macro-Fiscal Advisor) on medium-term expenditure forecasting. In the PFM area PFTAC anticipates continuing collaboration with the Australia-Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade funded Budget Advisor to assist Tuvalu staff in their development of medium-term budget planning and forecasting, including planning for asset repair/replacement financing. Page 61 revenue area, The Pacific Technical Assistance Mechanism (PACTAM) has supported Tuvalu’s Inland Revenue Department with a three year placement of a revenue advisor thus reducing reliance on PFTAC TA. The main objectives of PACTAM’s TA package included: (a) providing on-the-job training in tax audit; (b) strengthening debt and returns management; and (c) mentoring and advising the Director of Inland Revenue by providing technical tax advice. Indications are that good progress has been made to the extent that PACTAM recently scaled down its TA package from a full time advisor to quarterly short term expert visits. To obtain an objective and independent view of how far the organization has progressed its modernization journey the authorities have requested a PFTAC review to provide an assessment of current revenue administration performance and to help identify future reform priorities. In statistics , PFTAC resumed the provision of regular assistance on national accounts compilation ( ), taking over from the SPC which has been doing this since 2010. PFTAC carried out national accounts TA missions in February 2015 and January 2016 to help incorporate major administrative and survey data sources, improve methods and build capacity. However, the latter has been hampered by staff absence and with the sole compiler now embarking on long-term study leave, the productive outlook is uncertain. PFTAC originally provided support on balance of payments compilation) but this was then covered by the Japan Administered Account for Selected IMF Activities or JSA Project on the Improvement of External Sector Statistics in the Asia and Pacific Region, which formally concluded in October 2015. Further discussion is required to scope out how such support might be provided from now on. In financial sector supervision PFTAC provided strategic support to the authorities by reviewing the Banking Commissions Act and making some recommendations as to changes to the oversight authority, which were accepted and in 2015 the Act was amended. The Banking Commission and Banking Commissioner’s position remain, however if no one is appointed the Minister of Finance will be the Commissioner or someone appointed by him. The Minister exercised his prerogative and appointed the Permanent Secretary who will also hold the Banking Commissioner’s position. PFTAC staged two TA missions to Tuvalu in 2015 to review and assess the banking sector. Given the lack of in country capacity, establishing a basic on and off site supervision office will be problematic and will require TA resources. PFTAC did draft a basic set of prudential reporting and held a few workshops with the Ministry of Finance and local bank on how to implement this approach. A follow-up TA to the Ministry of Finance aimed at performing an on-site review of the Bank of Tuvalu and requiring, on a regular basis, the reporting of financial data would be the next step. No direct macroeconomic support is currently envisaged, with the TTFAC and ADB’s Public Expenditure Management TA currently taking the lead in these areas. The Pacific Technical Assistance Mechanism (PACTAM), an Australian Government initiative, places highly skilled employees in the Pacific to assist local employers to meet their human resource needs and contribute to developing capacity in the workplace. Page 62