Despite sound fiscal performance in the past two years, a dramatic expansion of budget spending in 2014 has substantially increased risks to fiscal sustainability. The 2014 budget continues to target a surplus, with a large temporary increase of foreign grants and TTF transfers financing a more than 20 percent expansion of spending, which is mostly one-off increases of current expenditure and includes a 25 percent rise in civil servant salary and a potentially costly revival of the Tuvalu Cooperative Society (TCS), which would supplement the supply of necessities to outer islands by private retailers The large salary increase has also induced public enterprises to increase employee wages by the same magnitude, adding to their operational costs. Tuvalu Cooperative Society (TCS) is owned by Tuvaluan people and used to be the main wholesaler and retailer. With increasing competition from private retailers, the TCS was forced to terminate most of its operations after incurring large losses. The TCS currently holds arrears of $A 2.5 million against external suppliers and domestic banks. WagesSocial 1/Goods and servicesGrant, subsidies & CSOCapitalOthers 2014 budget Percent change (RHS) Expenditure Breakdown (In millions of Australian dollars unless otherwise specified) Sources: Tuvalu authorities. 1/ Includes Tuvalu Medical Treatment Scheme, scholarship programs and Special Development Expenditure. Page 8 With on-budget foreign grants returning to historical average levels, the budget would move into a deficit from 2015 onwards and fully deplete the fiscal buffers over the medium term unless the spending increase is unwound. Medium-term fiscal risks arise from several sources. First, tax revenue might shrink as the tariff rates that apply to regional trade are cut under the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Second, there is a risk that fishing revenue might decline after its recent rapid increase as overfishing and climate change adversely impact fishing resources. Finally, vulnerabilities in banks and public enterprises may pose substantial liabilities to the government—bringing the capital of insolvent non-bank public enterprises to positive would cost at least 4 percent of GDP, while the cost of addressing banking vulnerabilities needs to be assessed under a regulatory framework. The government’ guarantee of public enterprise debt, notably including external loans borrowed by the fishing joint ventures, also constitutes contingent liabilities. To enhance fiscal sustainability, consolidation efforts are needed . Tax administration should be further strengthened, including through legal actions on non-compliance, and a tax policy review would be necessary given the uneven cost-benefit among different taxes. However, given the narrow economic base, the scope for further increases in tax revenue is limited, and most of the fiscal consolidation would more likely be achieved via expenditure control in the near term. To put the fiscal policy on a sustainable footing, the government expenditure should be scaled down from the 2014 budget level at 93 percent of GDP to about 80 percent of GDP in the next three years when the impact of budget spending cut on growth would be offset by the implementation of large infrastructure projects financed by development partners. To achieve this target, spending should be largely frozen—which would bring down its share in GDP to 84 percent within three years—while a few rapidly growing expenditures should be cut back. For example, although rolling back civil servants’ salary increase may be difficult, expenditures on goods and services as well as grants and subsidies—all budgeted to grow by double digits—should be put under tight scrutiny on the back of the newly introduced procurement mechanism and the PRM framework, and be reined in to the extent feasible. Moreover, reviving TCS would require additional financial support, which could cost 10 percent of GDP to clear arrears and regain market share. The authorities should explore more cost effective policies to supply necessities to the outer islands. Additionally, there is considerable room to improve the cost effectiveness of social programs such as the scholarship program and Tuvalu Medical Treatment Scheme (TMTS), which finances overseas treatment of Tuvaluan patients. Last but not least, the government should refrain from providing guarantees for public enterprise borrowing given the already high risk of debt distress. Beyond fiscal consolidation, a new medium-term fiscal framework is needed to ensure fiscal sustainability, address procyclicality and build buffers in view of the daunting challenges facing Tuvalu . Under this framework, the transfers between the budget, the CIF, and the TTF should follow a clear rule anchored by a structural balance target: Under PICTA, tariff rates for the trade among Pacific island countries will be cut to zero by 2015, and this rate cut would be deferred to 2017 for the least developed countries including Tuvalu. Page 9 Targeting a structural balance would reduce expenditure fluctuation as a result of revenue volatility. Given the weak capacity, staff suggests a simple approach to estimate the structural revenue, where fishing license fees are adjusted to reflect their moving average. As fishing license fees have been increasing markedly, targeting a structural balance would imply saving a portion of these fees for the time being. Staff estimates that, with the CIF already built up to a comfortable level, a structural surplus of 0.5-1 percent of GDP is needed to maintain fiscal buffers and bring down the risk of debt distress from high to moderate over the medium and long run. To help achieve the structural balance target, the CIF should be transformed into a fiscal stabilization fund that follows a clear rule of accumulation and withdrawal—temporary windfalls from fishing revenues should be saved in the CIF and it can be drawn down when there is a revenue shortfall. The TTF should serve as a rainy day fund, with the returns on investment saved in a reserve account for use in the event of severe adverse shocks. Marked progress has been made in strengthening public financial management. Notably, a central procurement unit has been established, and associated regulations adopted. The authorities also published a budget manual outlining the budget process and policies, strengthened the monitoring of outer island budget operations, and started releasing monthly reports of budget execution, which significantly enhanced transparency and facilitated budget control. Nevertheless, there is scope to further strengthen public financial management to improve transparency and safeguard fiscal resources. The budget process needs to be anchored by a sustainable medium-term fiscal framework that incorporates development objectives. The management of fishing license fees should be streamlined, with a focus to reconcile the treasury receipts and the sale of licenses by the Fisheries Department. Introducing a commitment control system would further improve budget management. Over the medium term, a wage-setting mechanism is necessary to ensure that public sector wage increases are in line with productivity gains in the economy. 2011201220132014 Proj.2015 Proj.2016 Proj.2017 Proj.2018 Proj.2019 Proj. CIF (LHS; $A mil.) -baseline CIF (LHS; $A mil.) -alternative 1/ Fiscal balance (RHS; % of GDP) -baseline Fiscal balance (RHS; % of GDP) -alternative 1/ Baseline and Alternative Scenarios Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.1/ The alternative scenario assumes a structural surplus of 0.5-1 percent of GDP over the long run. Page 10 The authorities shared staff’s views on fiscal sustainability risks. They worry about the lack of transparency in the TMTS and its potential overspending, and intend to contain its cost by establishing a comprehensive database and closely following patients’ treatment schedules. They also agreed to carefully estimate the cost of reviving the TCS and consider alternative options as needed. On debt sustainability, they generally concur with staff assessment, but indicate that the contingent liabilities from fishing joint ventures are not a key concern as the joint ventures have a favorable outlook and the probability for the government to assume their debt obligation is small. The authorities agreed with the staff’s proposal on introducing a medium-term fiscal framework. They share the concern about revenue volatility, and support the suggestion to have the fiscal policy anchored by a structural balance and make the TTF a rainy day fund, with its investment returns saved in a reserve account for large adverse shocks. The authorities are committed to further enhancing public financial management . They are developing the IT system to better reconcile fishing license fees between the Treasury and Fisheries Department. They will also aim to further improve public financial management when implementing the third phase of PRM.