The Bank and the Fund teams maintain a close working relationship and have an ongoing dialogue on macroeconomic and structural issues. Since Tuvalu’s decision to pursue membership of the Bretton Woods institutions in 2009, the Bank team has joined all IMF missions to Tuvalu since the country’s membership mission, including the Article IV missions. The teams agreed that Tuvalu’s main macroeconomic challenges are to ensure fiscal sustainability, strengthening public service delivery, and create a more supportive environment for development. Based on this shared assessment, the teams identified the following structural reform areas, all of which are also addressed in the authorities’ reform plan, as macro-critical: Strengthening fiscal buffers. In the absence of its own currency and monetary policy, sound fiscal policy is key to maintaining macroeconomic stability. Maintenance of buffer assets is key to ensuring sustainability. Maintaining adequate buffer assets will require sound fiscal policy including saving of cyclical revenues and expenditure restraint, including containing wage bill pressures. Moreover, there remains room to improve public financial management as well as strengthen public sector management to improve budget execution and effectiveness in public resource utilization. Adapting and responding to climate change. Tuvalu is one of the countries to be most affected by climate change and rising sea levels. In this context, climate change can lead to both structural and cyclical fiscal costs. To this end, explicitly recognizing the adaptation and response cost in budget will help ensure the continuity and efficiency on both spending and funding fronts. However, donor financing will remain important in enhancing the country’s ability to cope with natural disasters and climate change, given that the total costs may be too high for small states like Tuvalu to fully internalize by building buffers. Exploring opportunities for poverty reduction, job creation, and private sector development. Tuvalu’s geographic isolation, small size, and poor land quality have made it challenging to generate domestic private sector employment. Adequate education and training need to be provided for Tuvaluans to better utilize overseas job opportunities and to reduce rising poverty. Strengthening oversight on the financial sector will also facilitate improved access to finance and private sector activities. Strengthening public service delivery. The Government of Tuvalu in the Te Kakeega III and the medium term reform agenda identified improving service delivery in the health and education sectors as key objectives. Based on earlier analysis and sector strategic plans, the Government is continuing reforms to improve allocative and technical efficiency as well as to ensure sector financing sustainability. The teams expect to sustain the close cooperation going forward. Attachment 1 details the specific activities implemented and planned by the two teams over the period 2016 to 2018. Page 57 Tuvalu: Bank and Fund Implemented/Planned Activities in Macro-Critical World Bank Work Program Areas [ 2016-2018] Products Joint participation in Article IV Mission Country Policy Institutional Assessment Tuvalu Aviation Investment Program Third Budget Support Operation Pacific Regional Oceanscape Project Energy Project Telecom Project Expected/Actual Delivery Annual/Biennial Annual FY2017 FY2017 – FY18 IMF Work Program January 2016 PFTAC: Review Tax Reform June 2016 PFTAC: Onsite Examination of Planned for October 2016 Planned for January 2017 Page 58