Growth has been weak while inflation picked up moderately. Real GDP growth has been volatile averaging only 1 percent in the past decade. Activity has benefited from increased competition in the retail sector and a recent boom in the fisheries sector, while banking weaknesses constrain the financial support for the private sector, and the poorly managed public enterprises strain government finances and worsen the country’s business climate. Inflation rose to 3 percent by end-2013, largely reflecting a pickup in nonfood inflation. It benefited from lower global food and commodity prices, as well as trade diversification and increased retail competition, but prices rose on account of a weakening Australian dollar. The balance of payments has been supported by large fishing-related receipts and official aid. Owing to the introduction of the Vessel Day Scheme and the establishment of fishing joint ventures with Asian companies, both fishing exports and fishing license fees have more than doubled in just a few years, with each accounting for about half of GDP now. Foreign aid, including both budget support and off-budget project financing, has also hovered at around half of GDP. However, remittances, which used to be one of the most important sources of foreign exchange inflows, have shrunk dramatically since the global financial crisis, to 10 percent of GDP compared to the pre-crisis levels of nearly 20 percent. Imports, which closely correlate with fiscal spending, have been generally stable. The budget achieved a substantial surplus for the second consecutive year in 2013. Fishing license fees reached a record high in 2013 because of improved negotiating power under the Vessel Day Scheme and increased revenues under the bilateral treaty with the U.S. government. Tax revenue outperformed the budget target largely as a result of improved compliance following a tax audit of public enterprises and the favorable performance of a fishing joint venture as well as a VAT rate increase. These developments were further reinforced by higher-than-expected foreign grants. Current spending was generally restrained, and on-budget capital spending was small, reflecting the government’s weak implementation capacity. As a whole, the fiscal surplus reached 26.3 percent of GDP. The Tuvaluan government holds around 50 percent of the joint venture’s shares. Extrabudgetary spending supported by project financing from development partners have been around 25 percent of GDP. Page 6 Vulnerabilities of banks and public enterprises have further aggravated structural weaknesses. In the unsupervised state-owned dual-bank system, asset quality remains poor as half of the loan portfolio is nonperforming, which is caused to a large extent by government-sponsored programs implemented a few years ago and public enterprise borrowing. Although both banks, i.e. the National Bank of Tuvalu (NBT) and Development Bank of Tuvalu (DBT), have restricted their exposure to public enterprises and made substantial provisions, an accurate estimate of capital adequacy is impeded by the lack of a regulatory framework. The DBT—accounting for about10 percent of banking sector assets—has made substantial losses, with its net capital depleted from $A 2.5 million (7.2 percent of GDP) to $A 0.7 million (1.7 percent of GDP) in the past three years. The DBT further experienced a sharp drop in deposits in 2013 as depositors were concerned with its capacity to service obligations. Meanwhile, non-bank public enterprises, with some being insolvent already, accumulated losses of more than 3 percent of GDP in the past few years, leaving this sector’s total capital below 0.5 percent of GDP. (Appendix VI) The immense losses incurred by public enterprises represent deficiencies in governance and the cost of social responsibilities. There is no sign of significant exchange rate misalignment . The real effective exchange rate depreciated over the past year and has returned to its 10-year average on the back of a weakening Australian dollar. However, the economy’s competitiveness remains weak, with remoteness causing high transportation cost and isolation, and the lack of scale increasing transaction cost. The large budget expansion could exert inflationary pressure and cause real exchange rates to appreciate, undermining competitiveness. (Box 1)