The authorities are committed to supporting sustainable growth and socioeconomic transformation. Key objectives of their medium-term development plan include enhancing sustainable production and productivity; strengthening public service delivery; improving education and health; and reducing the infrastructure deficit to strengthen competitiveness. The latter has been at the center of the authorities’ economic agenda as infrastructure investments of around $11 billion—including PPPs—are expected over the next ten years (Box 4). Discussions centered on policies to support the medium-term strategy, including by preserving the hard-won price and financial sector stability; increasing revenue collection; improving spending efficiency; enhancing financial intermediation and access to bank services; and ensuring a stable regulatory environment, in which contracts and medium-term commitments are fully honored and procurement rules are transparently observed. Oil production will be an important component of the medium-term economic horizon. With recoverable crude oil reserves of 1.7 billion barrels out of potential reserves of 6.5 billion, oil production would start in FY2020/21 under a model that entails a crude export pipeline and a domestic refinery. While the government has identified a lead investor for the refinery, decisions on the pipeline’s route are still subject to economic and geopolitical considerations. Significant steps have been taken to speed-up investments in the sector including (i) granting one of the production licenses; (ii) announcing a bidding process for operations in six new blocks; (iii) starting to set up the institutions that will govern oil operations; and (iv) proposing parliament to remove the value-added tax (VAT) on capital equipment used in exploration and production activities. Despite the oil price decline, companies remain optimistic about the medium- term prospects. While operations will be largely externally financed, their domestic content is expected to have positive spillovers on employment and domestic banks’ operations. Page 19 Box 4. Developing Infrastructure Overview. In line with the National Development Plan (NDP II), the government has embarked on an ambitious infrastructure investment program to revamp the transport network and alleviate bottlenecks emanating from electricity shortfalls. The program will be gradually implemented during the next 10 years; financed through NCB, PPPs, and use of government savings (the oil, energy, and infrastructure funds): and accompanied by capacity building in project preparation, appraisal, monitoring, and execution. Key projects include: Electricity projects . A total of $4.6 billion is estimated. Besides the Karuma and Isimba dams and related substations—already under construction and financed by China’s Export Import Bank with government’s contributions—other plans include the construction of smaller HPPs and several transmission lines for rural electrification. Oil and oil-related infrastructure. The plan includes the construction of the Hoima oil refinery and a product pipeline to Kampala to be run as a PPP, and the Albertine region airport and roads, with a total investment of $1.8 billion. The crude oil pipeline is not included in these estimates, as it is expected to be privately financed. Transport infrastructure. Projects, worth $4.7 billion, include (i) the Kampala-Jinja highway and several other roads serving the Greater Kampala area under PPP arrangements; (ii) the upgraded Entebbe International Airport, financed by China’s Export Import Bank; and (iii) the initial phase of the standard gauge railway from Kampala to the Kenyan border. Economic Impact. A multiplier analysis points to a positive impact on growth during construction—about 1½ percent over the next five years—and an increase in potential output once projects come on stream. The projects are expected to have an import component of about 80 percent, thus limiting their impact on aggregate demand and inflation. Private sector credit growth will not be compromised because current spending and domestic borrowing will remain constrained, providing space for credit expansion. Capital spending is set to pick up by an average 4¼ percent of GDP during the period. Imports are expected to rise by about 3½ percent of GDP per year, leading to an equal expansion of the current account deficit over the period. The impact on reserves is determined by the domestic component of the financing, which amounts to $515 million over the construction period. The total impact on external debt will be about 14 percent of GDP. Progress towards East African Community (EAC) regional integration is gradually taking place and has the potential to further enhance trade and structural transformation. Uganda ratified the Monetary Union Protocol, and has been actively participating in work to establish EAC regional institutions and to create a fiscal surveillance process. The Ugandan authorities plan to achieve greater integration by continuing progress towards the reduction of non- tariff barriers; implementing common-market agreements; integrating payment systems; and harmonizing policies in the context of the medium-term convergence program. These Page 20 improvements would allow Uganda to reap its comparative advantages and maximize efficiency of production, raising prospects for attracting investors. Financing the medium-term development strategy requires domestic revenue mobilization and external borrowing. Domestic revenue mobilization will entail gains in public and private savings.  On the public sector side, the government plans to use savings in the oil an energy funds to finance part of the infrastructure program. Bold action is needed, however, to raise tax revenue as this is the most sustainable and reliable source of development financing. Welcome steps are being taken by the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to improve enforcement and compliance, but a sustained increase in the ratio will require incorporating the large informal sector into the tax-paying portion of the economy and ensuring that large taxpayers comply with their obligations—no simple task. Although many statutory tax exemptions were removed, loopholes remain on the policy front. Taxpayer-specific exemptions still exist, and the government is under near constant pressure to provide tax breaks (Box 5). Continued diligence is required to resist these pressures and create a tax system that is efficient and fair for everyone.  On the private sector side, deepening the financial sector and improving bank access are essential for making private sector credit an engine for growth. Sustainable financial deepening will largely rely on making steady progress on financial inclusion, which will in turn depend on actions to boost the bank deposit base; enhance the intermediation role of non-bank financial institutions, including the National Social Security Fund (NSSF); and develop the money and capital markets. To this end, there is scope for simplifying procedures to open bank accounts, locating outlets in remote areas, upgrading trading and settlement systems, improving investors’ literacy, and leveraging regional opportunities for the local stock exchange. The current massive use of mobile money is a clear demonstration of the population’s demand to move away from cash transactions (Annex IV). FDI flows will add to domestic credit within this financing strategy. External borrowing will complement the financing needs. With insufficient domestic savings and ample space for borrowing, external financing is a key requirement. The authorities remain committed to pursuing concessional loans as the preferred means of financing, when available. For infrastructure projects, however, they have started to secure NCB, still on favorable terms, within levels that would allow total debt to remain at low risk of distress. Staff’s debt sustainability analysis, which includes the infrastructure package as a whole, concludes that the public and publicly guaranteed external debt-to-GDP ratio in net present value (NPV) terms would peak at about 25 percent in FY2020/21. Even combined with domestic borrowing plans, total public debt would remain well below the benchmark associated with heightened vulnerabilities. Nonetheless, the relatively short average maturity of domestic debt and the high debt service-to-revenue ratio are matters of concern (Debt Sustainability Analysis). Page 21 Box 5. Enhancing Tax Revenue Tax Revenue to GDP Ratios Weak tax performance. The tax-to-GDP ratio in Uganda was one of the lowest in the region prior to the GDP rebasing and is definitely the lowest afterward. Over the past ten years the ratio only increased by 0.2 percentage points per year, on average. This weak performance was due to a combination of ineffective tax policy and poor compliance. On the policy front, the Income and VAT Acts contained many exemptions. On the administrative side, a VAT gap analysis showed that 60 percent of the gap was due to compliance, partly related to deficiencies in data integrity and operational weaknesses in tax administration. Tanzania Rwanda Source: IMF staff calculations. 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Kenya Burundi Uganda (Pre-rebasing) Successful concerted efforts. Many statutory VAT and income tax exemptions were eliminated in FY2014/15, and improvements in coordination between the URA and local governments have paid off. As a result, the tax-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase substantially. An additional increase is expected next year as focus begins to shift from tax policy changes to tax administration improvements. Planned improvements include URA’s efforts to assess income from rental properties and identify businesses that are accessing local services but not filing national tax returns. Use of enhanced controls and creation of a single central processing center for all customs clearances should boost customs revenue. Changing the tax-paying culture. As part of the EAC convergence criteria, Uganda has targeted a tax-to- GDP ratio of 25 percent by 2021. Although some of the increase is expected to come from oil revenues, an effort far beyond what has been achieved in the last ten years is needed. While URA’s audit and enforcement efforts—an expensive way to collect taxes—will bear fruit, sustained improvement in tax collections will only be possible if the citizens of Uganda pay tax voluntarily. For this to happen, they need to be convinced that their tax payments are being put to good use and that corruption is being eliminated. Strengthening social protection is another key ingredient for accomplishing the medium-term development agenda. Although progress on poverty reduction has been significant, inequality remains high, suggesting that investments in infrastructure and service delivery are not sufficient for attaining inclusive growth. While there is evidence that fiscal policy has played a key role in boosting growth and addressing inequality, there is a clear need for enhancing the social support system (Box 6 and Annex V). Page 22 Box 6. Strengthening Social Protection Poverty and vulnerability. Uganda has made impressive progress on poverty reduction over the past two decades, with poverty declining from 56 percent in the early 1990s to 19.7 percent in 2013, allowing for early achievement of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving poverty by 2015. However, vulnerability remains widespread, rural and urban inequality has increased, and still about 7 million Ugandans live below the poverty line. While accelerating growth and upgrading infrastructure will contribute to further reductions of poverty and vulnerability, the most vulnerable segments of the population are not likely to fully share the benefits. Furthermore, the traditional social protection system (family support and other community self-help initiatives) has weakened in the last few decades. Benefits of well-targeted protection. Experience in other countries in the world and the region show that the establishment of a comprehensive, well-targeted, and well-defined social protection system can improve productivity through health and education enhancements; function as a shock-absorber to various forms of economic instability; benefit the wider local economy; and contribute to achieving inclusive growth, creating employment, and building community assets. Social protection systems do not have to be costly. Average spending in safety nets in low income countries in Africa is 1.1 percent of GDP, and 2.8 when considering social protection in a broader sense . Donors finance almost 75 percent of social safety nets in low income Africa. Revamping social protection in Uganda. Social protection in Uganda is entrenched in the Constitution, Vision 2040 and the NDP II. Interventions have nonetheless been limited and fragmented — with only 0.4 percent of GDP a year devoted to direct income support and 1.2 percent of GDP to total social protection — and donors played an important role. A new policy framework is being developed to scale up interventions, covering the areas of direct income support, contributory social assistance, and social care services. Monchuk, Victoria (2013). “Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in Africa”. Directions in Development. Washington, DC, World Bank.