P10 P25 P75 P90 Employment growth (%) Distribution of Macroeconomic Outcomes (percent) GDP growth (%) The outlook is broadly favorable underpinned by consistent macro-financial policies. Real GDP growth is projected at 5¼ percent in FY2014/15, 5¾ percent in FY2015/16, and an average 6¼ percent over the medium term, driven by scaled-up public investment and a rebound in private sector demand. Public investment financing, alongside weaker exports and tourism receipts, will drive the current account deficit up while preserving reserves at 4 months of imports. The rebound in private activity will be supported by an expected expansion in credit to the private sector of about 10 percent per year in real terms—gradually boosting the credit-to-GDP ratio to about 17 percent by FY2019/20. This pace—expected to prevent a reoccurrence of credit boom-and-bust cycles and preserve economic stability—is consistent with real GDP, consumption, and investment growth estimates, as judged by observed trends in other low-income countries. Low consumer prices—with average core inflation projected to remain within the PSI consultation inner band at 3½ and 6¼ percent for end FY2014/15 and FY2015/16—will underpin the encouraging outlook. Private consumption growth (%) Investment growth (%) Inflation (%) Source: IMF Staff Calculations Text Table 3. Macroeconomic Outlook FY 2011/12 FY 2012/13 FY 2013/14 FY 2014/15 FY 2015/16 FY 2016/17 Real GDP growth Headline CPI inflation, period average Core CPI inflation, period average External current account balance International reserves (stock, months of imports) Overall balance Overall deficit excluding large infrastructure projects financed by non-concessional external borrowing and BoU recapitalization Policy rate (end of period) Credit to the private sector (annual growth, percent) (Percent) (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) The authorities follow this definition to better assess the impact of the fiscal stance on domestic demand. Sources: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of Uganda, Bank of Uganda, and IMF staff calculations. This conclusion is based on the use of an excel-based toolkit to assess consistency between real sector and financial sector forecasts. Page 18 Risks to the outlook reflect economic and political vulnerabilities. Uganda has ample buffers and a flexible policy framework to respond to potential shocks—including low inflation, healthy international reserves, low levels of debt, a resilient financial system, a flexible exchange rate, and an improved PFM system. Nonetheless, the economy is vulnerable and risks are tilted to the downside. In the short run, expenditure overruns could materialize in the pre-electoral environment, potentially leading to a hike in inflation or to tight domestic credit conditions that could crowd out the private sector, affect banks’ balance sheets, and hamper growth. Slower growth in key trading partners and further spillovers from lower global liquidity could trigger capital outflows, squeezing liquidity and generating currency mismatches for banks and corporations. In the medium term, the complex commercial and legal aspects surrounding FDI in the oil sector could delay the planned investments. Other risks stem from postponements or cost overruns in the planned infrastructure projects. Security issues in the region pose additional challenges (Annexes II and III).