The inflation targeting framework has been successful, although a few challenges need to be addressed to ensure its long-term efficiency. Underpinned by a strong commitment to the inflation target, clear arrangements for monetary policy formulation, revamped policy instruments, and continuous learning from past experiences, the framework has been effective in keeping inflation low. The monetary transmission has worked well in spite of the shallowness of financial markets. Nonetheless, some challenges remain, including insufficient institutional arrangements to prevent government’s use of deposits in BoU accounts beyond agreed levels, and shortcomings in inflation forecasting capabilities and fiscal-monetary policy coordination (Annex VI). The authorities have committed to taking action to address these shortcomings, including by agreeing on a floor below which the balances in the Uganda Consolidated Fund—the main government’s account—would not decline, and upgrading the BoU’s technical capacity. Both will result in improved decision making. Recent inflation volatility has complicated monetary policy decisions. Inflation and inflation expectations have fluctuated over the last 18 months in response to sharp variations in the shilling (a fast depreciation following a significant appreciation); the food price evolution (not only seasonal but also related to weather conditions), and fiscal uncertainties. This volatility generated an understandable monetary tightening bias. Staff conducted consultations with the BoU on the factors behind the fall of average core inflation (3.1 percent in December 2014) below the inner band of the inflation consultation clause (3.7 percent). The authorities explained that prospects for loosening the Core Inflation Forecast (annual average percent change)* *This is calculated as the 12-month average of the y-o-y percent change of Core CPI Sources: Bank of Uganda and IMF Staff Calculations Medium term target Outer Bounds (3%) Inner Bounds (2%) Core Inflation Inflation consultation target Page 26 stance in the first half of 2014 were constrained by (i) the start of a shilling depreciation trend that threatened to persist in the context of weakening trade; (ii) an expected increase of food prices; and (iii) unclear fiscal prospects amid mounting spending promises by politicians. The depreciation risk materialized, at higher-than-anticipated rates, driving the BoU’s decision to tighten the stance by 100 basis points in April. Given the high share of imported goods in the CPI, import prices play a key role in inflation behavior, with an estimated pass-through factor of 0.4–0.5. In view of this and of the narrowing output gap, the authorities’ decision to tighten the stance was appropriate. Staff inquired whether some monetary easing last year could have possibly helped reduce inflation volatility and limit the interest rate hike given the monetary transmission lags. The authorities indicated their preference not to allow for swings in the policy stance, as frequent changes could jeopardize signaling and confuse the markets. Going forward, the BoU intends to continue to adapt monetary policy to evolving conditions to ensure that core inflation remains within the target range. The BoU has managed the tradeoffs between interest rates and exchange rate behavior well, but has faced difficulties in times of market turbulence. Since the adoption of inflation targeting, the BoU has let the shilling find its market price while preserving international reserves. Foreign exchange interventions have been limited to smoothing excessive variations that would generate unfounded nervousness or threaten the inflation objective, and have been sterilized. In mid-March, however, the BoU intervened strongly on the sale side (gross sales amounted to $375 million in the first quarter of 2015 compared to around $10 million in 2013 and $140 million in 2014). In doing so, the BoU was successful in calming the markets, but to stop speculation, it intentionally allowed a liquidity shortage for a few days (by incomplete sterilization), temporarily pushing the 7-day interbank rate above the upper 3 percent band around the CBR, and forcing banks to borrow needed liquidity (through the Lombard facility) at high rates. Staff recommended dealing with speculation by building policy credibility rather than by allowing discrepancies between the CBR and the 7-day interbank rate. Fully sterilizing all market interventions will provide clear monetary policy signals, while ensuring that price stability remains the BoU’s primary objective. The authorities’ program of foreign exchange reserve build up will continue albeit with a different modality. Relatively high FDI and portfolio inflows, partly related to the presence of foreign-owned businesses in Uganda’s banking, telecommunications and retail sectors, allow for continued reserve accumulation in preparation for the expected rise in government’s import needs. Until April, the BoU carried out a program of pre-announced BoU purchases through daily auctions, which was only interrupted during days when the BoU intervened on the sale side. More recently the BoU reached agreement with seven banks to buy a fixed daily amount from each of them. Staff expressed preference for market-based competitive foreign exchange auctions to allow for clarity of objectives, promote market deepening, and prevent market distortions. The authorities explained that the new system is well understood by all parties, introduces predictability, and is being used on a pilot basis to assess its effectiveness. Page 27 Figure 3. Uganda: Monetary Sector Developments and Outlook The interbank rate has been broadly aligned with the policy rate except for isolated episodes... Central Bank and Interbank Rate (percent) 7-day interbank rate Central bank rate 3 percent band on CBR …but the transmission to lending rates has been more …as have been the Treasury bill rates... Evolution of Treasury Bill (percent) CB rate 182 day T-bill 91 Days 364 Days Excess reserves in the banking system have remained elevated. Banking System Excess Reserves (as a share of base money) Excess Reserves …and dollarization remains high. Bank Credit to the Private Sector as a Share of Total Domestic currency credit Foreign currency credit sluggish. Interest Rate Structure (percent) CB rate Time deposits Lending rate Credit is gradually growing… Credit to GDP Ratio (percent) Sources: Bank of Uganda, Bloomberg and IMF staff calculations. Page 28 Several actions to improve monetary policy effectiveness are underway. The BoU has taken steps to reduce volatility in overnight market rates by allowing all banks (previously only primary dealers) to access BoU operations. It is also strengthening its inflation forecasting skills, institutionalizing procedures to improve the decision making process, and studying the possibility of rearranging the reserve requirement cycle to smooth liquidity conditions. The latter would enhance operational effectiveness, potentially reducing speculation exacerbated by insufficient BoU short- term liquidity management facilities. SECURING A MORE EFFECTIVE CONTRIBUTION OF THE FINANCIAL SECTOR TO GROWTH The banking sector is broadly resilient to key adverse shocks. Stress tests regularly conducted by the BoU and those carried out with staff—including one to assess resilience to a combination of shocks—confirm the banking sector’s relative strength. Specifically, the system can tolerate shocks such as increased NPLs, deposit withdrawals, and a large shilling depreciation, suggesting that credit, liquidity, and foreign exchange risks are well contained (Box 7). The BoU does not stress test banks’ resilience to lending rate hikes because of insufficient data availability. Staff welcomed ongoing efforts to collect granular data on interest bearing assets and liabilities classified by maturity buckets, which would allow better measurement of the impact of interest rates changes on banks’ solvency. Despite bank stability reassurances, there are some sources of vulnerability that call for caution . Staff acknowledged that existing prudential requirements and risk-based supervision provide assurances of banks’ strength to deal with shocks. Noting that stress test results usually mask diverse impacts on individual banks, the authorities agreed that further efforts to deter any negative impact of real sector developments on bank balance sheets—mainly due to potential interest rate and exchange rate volatility—are needed. Discussions covered the following issues: High dollarization. 37 percent of deposits and 43 percent of loans are denominated in foreign currency. These shares have increased, possibly reflecting depositors’ inclination to protect the real value of their funds and borrowers’ preference for lower financing costs. Regulations in place—banks’ required net open position in foreign currency is 25 percent of capital; foreign exchange loans are mainly granted to hedged borrowers; and an 80 percent loan-to-deposit ratio is in place for operations in foreign currency—mitigate risks associated with foreign currency operations. Staff acknowledged that liquidity risks from banks’ balance sheet mismatches seem to be contained, but called for guarding against credit risks associated with possible currency mismatches in borrowers’ balance sheets. To complement current assessments on the effects of shilling depreciation on banks’ net open positions and transaction costs, it would be advisable to revamp on-site inspections to examine more closely the quality of foreign currency loans. Concentration and related-party risks. Gi ven that the largest borrowers operate with all systemic banks, their default would seriously harm the system’s capital. There is a need to strengthen data verification and monitoring, and ensure strict compliance with the regulations to avoid the risks posed by credit concentration. Page 29 Provisioning of bad loans. Provisions as a share of NPLs stand at 55 percent, and the general provisioning ratio for watch loans—those that have been past due for 30 to 89 days—at 1 percent. While the loan write-off and collateral policies are strict, staff encouraged the authorities to consider an increase in the general provisioning ratio for watch loans as recommended in the 2011 FSAP update. Cross–border transactions. The dominant presence of subsidiaries of foreign banks in the system involves transactions with nonresidents. While risks of cross-border flow reversals do not seem too high—a sudden withdrawal of nonresident funds would only affect 1.5 percent of bank liabilities—more detailed monitoring of offshore investor activities is warranted. Consolidated supervision . Cooperation with foreign regulators through supervisory colleges with regional presence is gradually enhancing the quality of consolidated supervision. Nonetheless, further efforts are needed to exchange information, address financial group issues more systematically, and prevent regulatory arbitrage. Profit Decomposition of Bank Interest Rate Spreads (percent) While financially sound, the banking system’s role in credit intermediation is weak, hampered by high operational costs, insufficient competition, and low policy credibility. The recent recovery in credit is welcome and its sectoral distribution does not raise credit risk. However, at about 11 percent, spreads between time deposit and lending rates in domestic currency are high by international standards. The low deposit base and elevated overhead costs (40 percent of income) hinder economies of scale gains in bank operations. Profits are high suggesting insufficient competition. Moreover, banks’ business models, with a large share of assets devoted to investments in Treasury bills, reflect cautious risk taking, as well as curtailed policy predictability given the large swings in interest rates, thus jeopardizing credit growth. Although there is some evidence that the lending channel is functioning well, improved bank efficiency and competition would result in better monetary policy transmission. The BoU has made progress in implementing the FSAP update recommendations, but many are waiting for the approval of supporting legislation (Text Table 4). Reforms contained in the Financial Institutions Act (FIA), currently before parliament, (i) require banks to maintain a capital buffer in addition to the minimum capital requirements; (ii) allow for agent banking (licenses to carry out financial institutions business through an agent); and (iii) permit operations of Islamic banking (license to operate financial businesses under Islamic procedures). An exercise to decompose spreads confirms that high operating costs and profits are the main drivers of high spreads in Uganda (Mugume, A. Apaa, J. and Ojwiya, C. “Interest Spreads in Uganda: Bank Specific Characteristics or Policy Changes?” Bank of Uganda Staff Papers, vol 3. No.2, 2009). Reserve Requirements Source: Bank of Uganda Provisions Overhead Costs Page 30 Box 7. Uganda: Banking Sector Stress Tests Based on the Cihak model, the BoU regularly conducts stress tests (STs) to measure credit and liquidity risks on the banking sector and publishes the results annually. In its most recent STs exercise, the BoU assessed sensitivity to single-factor shocks on the basis of end-2014 bank-by-bank data. In addition, BoU and IMF staff carried up ad-hoc STs to assess foreign exchange risk and to test the system’s sensitivity to a combined set of shocks. On credit risk, the BoU assesses the impact on the core-tier-1 capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of a deterioration in loan quality by applying: A uniform shock to total performing loans: a “breaking point” approach is used to find the NPL ratio that would trigger a large bank to fail CAR compliance. The trigger is then applied to all other banks. A uniform shock to sectoral performing loans: the same “breaking point” approach is used to find the NPL ratio that would trigger a large bank to stop complying with the CAR due to the portfolio deterioration of business sectors exceeding 25 percent of the total loan portfolio. A proportional increase in NPLs to large borrowers (concentration risk): to measure the impact on the CAR of the default of three or the five largest borrowers of each bank. Results suggest that the first large bank’s CAR would fall below the required level when 19.6 percent of its loans become nonperforming. A total of seven banks would get undercapitalized, with the system’s CAR falling from 19.7 percent to 12.6 percent. When the five largest borrowers of each bank default, the system’s capital would fall to 11.6 percent. In both cases, the CAR would remain above the threshold. On liquidity risk, BoU’s simulations to measure the impact on the liquidity ratio include: A bank run with daily deposit withdrawals of 6 percent of total deposits for five consecutive days. A sudden withdrawal of all deposits of the NSSF, a big player in the market. A sudden withdrawal of all funds held by offshore clients. Results suggest that the liquidity ratio would decline from 43 percent to 26, 41, and 37 percent, respectively, as a result of each of the above shocks. Therefore, the system as a whole would continue to meet the threshold of 20 percent even though for a few banks, the ratio would fall below the floor. On foreign exchange (FX) risk, BoU and IMF staff analyzed the impact on the net open foreign exchange position from: A depreciation of the shilling against US dollar by up to 50 percent. Results show that both the net open position in foreign currency and the system’s CAR would remain within the required thresholds after the shock. On combined credit, liquidity, and FX risks, BoU and IMF staff measured the impact on solvency and liquidity of: The NPL ratio rising to 19.6 percent (consistent with the trigger to assess credit risk) combined with 50 percent depreciation, and 3-day successive withdrawals of 6 percent of deposits. Results show that banks’ capital is vulnerable to multiple risks. The system’s core CAR would fall to 11.9 percent with seven undercapitalized banks presenting a capital shortfall equivalent to 1.8 percent of GDP. Further, the system’s liquid asset ratio would fall to 18.2 percent (below the regulatory requirement of 20 percent), and five banks would suffer liquidity shortages. Page 31 Figure 4. Uganda: Financial Sector Developments The financial sector is sound… Selected Financial Sector Indicators (percent) Regulatory capital (percent of risk-weighted assets) Return on equity (percent) Specific provisions to NPLs NPLs to total gross loans (RHS) The credit portfolio is diversified among various sectors... Contribution to Private Credit Growth (percent) Other Construction/ real estate Manufacturing Private consumption Trade Agriculture Interest rate spreads remain high… Earnings and Profitability (percent) Spread between lending and deposit rates (RHS) Return on assets (LHS) Overhead costs to income (RHS) Sources: Bank of Uganda, World Bank, and IMF staff calculations. …and foreign exchange exposures are contained. Market Sensitivity (percent) Forex exposure to regulatory tier 1 capital Forex loans to forex deposits …and NPLs are declining from a recent peak. NPLs as a Share of Total Loans (percent) Other Construction Trade Manufacturing Agriculture …and financial access remains limited Account at a Financial Institution (percent of population 15+, 2014) SSA (developing) EAC Rural Youth Female Poor Page 32