In the context of moderate growth and exchange rate depreciation, inflation is coming up from depressed levels: According to rebased estimates (Box 2), real GDP growth was 4½ percent in FY2013/14, driven by services, trade, construction, and manufacturing—below the estimated potential of about 6 percent. More recently, economic activity is picking up, led by public investment and a recovery in private consumption driven by higher real incomes and stronger credit growth. The nominal exchange rate against the US dollar appreciated by 7 percent in the year through February 2014, and since then depreciated by 20-25 percent. Sharp pressures were felt in early 2015 reflecting 1) a portfolio rebalancing in response to the dollar appreciation; 2) increased foreign exchange demand from corporations to repatriate their profits; 3) lower exports to and remittances from South Sudan; 4) some decline in FDI linked to oil Potential growth is estimated on the basis of the rebased series using HP filters and a Kalman filter applied to a simple semi-structural model. However, given that growth prior to FY2009/10 was not revised when the rebasing took place, results should be taken with caution. Page 12 investment plan deferrals; and 5) election-related market nervousness as memories of the 2011 elections—when rapid credit expansion and expenditure overruns drove inflation out of control—reverberated. The real effective exchange rate appreciated by about 4 percent in 2014, mainly reflecting the weakening of Uganda’s main trading partners’ currencies, and it is close to the level implied by the estimated current account norm (Annex I). Inflation has been contained in the context of declining food crops and oil prices, the 2013 shilling appreciation, and moderate economic activity. Nonetheless, the recent exchange rate depreciation has started to pass through to core inflation despite the mitigating impact of declining fuel prices (Box 3). Annual core inflation fell to 2.7 percent in December 2014 and rebounded to 4.8 percent in May 2015. Box 2. Effects of Rebasing Gross Domestic Product The rebasing exercise. In November 2014, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics rebased the GDP series from calendar year 2002 to FY2009/10 to better reflect the dynamism of economic activity and improve the quality of statistics. The new estimates incorporate more comprehensive survey data; compile production by industry supply and use tables; and introduce methodological changes to improve accuracy and coverage (e.g. compilation of intermediate consumption, and inclusion of the informal sector and non- profit institutions in the national accounts). GDP was revised upwards by 17¼ percent in FY2009/10, the base year. The services sector and to a lesser extent the agricultural sector increased their share in GDP, while the share of industry and construction declined. Implications for economic analysis. Some indicators experienced significant change, including the debt-to-GDP ratio, almost 4 percentage points lower, at 29 percent in FY2013/14; and the tax-to GDP ratio, about 1 percentage point lower, at 11½ percent. There are also implications for policy analysis. The impact of the credit boom-and-bust cycle that started in 2011, for example, looks now more pronounced, with GDP growing by almost 10 percent in FY2010/11 (6½ percent estimated earlier) and decelerating more significantly in the following years. The slower economic recovery looks now more consistent with the behavior of banks’ nonperforming loans (NPLs) and tax collections of the past two years. Real GDP Growth (percent) Rebased Old Source: Uganda Authorities Page 13 Box 3. Impact of the Decline in International Oil Prices In the short term. Lower oil prices represent a positive supply shock, resulting in foreign exchange savings and a slight growth stimulus. A one percent reduction in international oil prices is estimated to lead to a 0.2 percent decline in total nominal imports in US dollars, implying that the expected average price for the current fiscal year would lead to a 10 percent reduction in the total import bill. With pump prices fully liberalized, lower prices allow consumers to divert income to other purposes. In the absence of fuel subsidies, the fiscal impact is also positive, as the government saves in the energy bill and collects slightly higher excise taxes (which are based on quantities and not prices). In the first nine months of the fiscal year, revenue from petroleum duties increased by around 18 percent compared to the same period in the previous year. The decline in oil prices is also expected to feed into lower electricity prices. Short-term benefits of the oil price decline have been less pronounced in Uganda than in other countries in the region. In the past nine months, petrol average pump prices have declined by 10 percent in domestic currency (21 percent in US dollar terms) on account of the shilling depreciation; the taxation modality; the oligopolistic nature of suppliers; and the lags between purchases and distribution. In the medium term. The impact would likely be less benign. Oil investments might be delayed in the context of lower profitability. Moreover, many interrelated investment decisions are dependent on the oil price, including granting production licenses; signing commercial and financial arrangements; developing engineering, procurement and construction plans; and agreeing on transnational infrastructure works. Pass-through of Changes in International Fuel Prices (June 2014 to January 2015) Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff calculations. í P & é m ã S c f h t S c s g d d V b C p R c f L m C p c d h C w s t B b m z h t s L t c P l t C d w R l g S d g U d B h b G t R g C f p R z s F h c y S v I d t ô C g C b m y K g l z w S b m Z w l b m G G l g g b L B k B p h t E g q s l d s l l S Monthly Variation of Petrol Prices (USD and Ush) Imports of Petroleum Products (in millions of US$) Feb-14 Apr-14 Jun-14 Aug-14 Oct-14 Dec-14 Feb-15 Source: Bank of Uganda (preliminary data the most recent) Oct-14 Nov-14 Dec-14 Jan-15 Petrol prices in Ush (m/m) Feb-15 Mar-15 Apr-15 Petrol prices in USD (m/m) 1. Average in 8 locations. Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics. According to standardized calculations for the whole sub-Saharan region, the pass-through from the oil price decline to pump prices in Uganda was about 14 percent, compared to a regional average of about 36 percent (IMF Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Economic Outlook, Spring 2015). Page 14 Recent indicators show that the banking sector remains sound. Banks are well International reserves declined reflecting the spike in dollar demand for financial transactions in the context of depressed exports, but continue to be adequate. The current account deficit remained large owing to structurally high trade deficits. Imports of capital goods and petroleum products are increasing, while both coffee and non-coffee exports have stagnated since mid-2013 reflecting depressed food exports to South Sudan. Temporarily, strong travel receipts partially offset the impact of the large trade deficit. FDI, loans, and portfolio inflows have financed the deficit. However, since late 2014 total net financial inflows have slowed down. capitalized, liquid, and profitable. As of March-2015, the core capital-to-asset ratio averaged 20.8 percent, well above the minimum requirement of 8 percent. At over 29 percent, the statutory liquidity requirement (minimum 20 percent) was met. Consistent with the rebound in private sector activity, NPLs declined from the March 2014 peak of 6.2 percent to 4.2 percent of total loans in March 2015—getting closer to the 5-year historical average of 3.8 percent—boosting average profitability. Credit and liquidity risks related to loan quality and currency mismatches remained low. The strong monetary tightening that followed the 2011 credit boom led to a sharp decline in credit and growth as lending rates picked up with a short lag. Once inflation stabilized, the significant drop in the central bank rate (CBR) in 2013 led to a similar fall in interbank rates (reflecting the functioning first stage in the interest rate transmission mechanism), although the decline in lending rates was more sluggish, revealing a longer lag in monetary transmission than in the tightening period, leading to a gradual credit recovery. The monetary policy transmission asymmetry is explained by the banks’ cautious focus on loan recovery and their high operating costs, coupled with some crowding out effects as government’s domestic borrowing requirements increased at that time. Now at 16 percent year on year, credit growth—mainly to manufacturing, trade and construction—is significantly higher than the 10 percent average of the previous two years, reflecting an improvement in the bank lending monetary transmission channel. However, lending rates remain relatively high. Private sector credit recovered as lending rates declined and credit risks dissipated. Text Table 1. Key Interest Rates (percent) Jul-11 Central Bank Rate 7-day interbank market Deposit (Uganda shillings) Time Deposit (Uganda shillings) Lending (Uganda shillings) Treasury bill yields 91-day 182-day 364-day 1. Data from Mar-15 used when Apr-15 unavailable. Source: Bank of Uganda Jul-12 Jul-13 Jul-14 Sep-14 Dec-14 Apr-15 Despite significant banking sector growth, financial intermediation is limited and access to bank services low. The number of commercial banks has increased from 14 to 25 with a large influx of foreign banks, which currently hold 80 percent of assets. However, the system is small Page 15 (total assets equal 27 percent of GDP) and highly concentrated, with the three largest banks holding 50 percent of assets. In a cash-based economy that suffers from a low savings rate, the deposit base (about 18 percent of GDP) is limited, and credit to the private sector stands at just 14 percent of GDP. Financial access is low with only 28 percent of adults owning a formal bank account. Over the last year, economic policies had to respond to volatile foreign exchange flows, declining commodity prices, and the complex geopolitical environment On monetary policy, the BoU kept a tight policy stance, holding the CBR constant at 11 percent from June 2014 to April 2015, and then raising it to 12 percent, on account of global developments and the ongoing and expected exchange rate pass-through. The BoU’s intervention in the foreign exchange market has been focused on its program of announced dollar purchases for reserve build-up, but in the last few months it has been intervening on the sale side to smooth the fast-paced shilling depreciation. This intervention, along with increased infrastructure-related government imports, drove reserves down from $3.2 billion in end-December to $2.9 billion in mid-May (about 4 months of imports). Regarding the financial sector, to shield banks’ balance sheets from the impact of ongoing shocks and mitigate short-term liquidity risks, the BoU further integrated risk-based analysis into its supervision work; introduced a liquidity coverage ratio to ensure that banks hold sufficient high quality liquid assets to cover 100 percent of net cash flows over a 30-day period (well above international standards); and advanced efforts to improve regulation of mobile money payments and financial literacy. On fiscal policy, in FY2014/15 the authorities embarked on an ambitious revenue enhancing program that yielded tax revenue beyond expectations, and kept expenditures below the budget level due to delays in external disbursements for HPPs. A supplementary budget, needed to reallocate resources, did not add expenses to the budget, but together with the delays in HPPs, tilted it towards current spending. Text Table 2. Uganda: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, FY2012/13–2015/16 (Percent of GDP ) 3rd Review 3rd Review Old GDP New GDP Total revenue and grants Revenue Tax Expenditures and net lending Current expenditures Development expenditures Other spending Net lending and investment HPP projects Bank of Uganda recapitalization Overall balance Financing External financing (net) Domestic financing (net) Errors and omissions Memorandum item Overall deficit excluding large infrastructure projects financed by non- concessional external borrowing and BoU recapitalization Sources: Ugandan authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. All figures are based on the rebased GDP, except the 3rd review "old GDP" column. Other spending includes contingency reserve and repayment of domestic arrears. The authorities follow this definition to better assess the impact of the fiscal stance on domestic demand. Page 16 Figure 1. Uganda: Recent Economic Developments Economic growth has been moderate led by the service sector… Contribution to GDP Growth by Sector (percent, y-o-y) Taxes on products Agriculture Services Total Industry Inflation has been declining helped by falling food crops’ prices but is now rebounding… …in line with leading indicators Growth of Composite Index of Economic Activity (CIEA) (percent, m-o-m) Growth of CIEA Average Growth …in line with the recent exchange rate depreciation. Nominal Exchange Rates (Uganda shillings/Foreing Currency) US Euro Kenya (RHS) …but international reserves coverage remains adequate. International Reserve Buffers (millions of US$ and months of imports) Gross Reserves Months of next year's imports (RHS) Inflation Rate (percent, y-o-y) Headline Core Food crops (RHS) The current account deficit is widening… External Situation (millions of US$) Current account Change in official reserve Capital and financial account External debt (percent of GDP, RHS) Sources: Bank of Uganda, World Bank, and IMF staff calculations. Page 17