A challenging geo-political situation over the last two years has not disrupted economic and financial stability. Security concerns following unrest in neighboring countries and terrorist attacks in the region have weighed on Uganda’s spending needs, exports, and remittances. Declining donor support in reaction to concerns about governance and human rights and reduced development partners’ aid budgets have spurred domestic borrowing requirements. Moreover, the proximity of the February 2016 presidential and parliamentary elections has generated uncertainty. Despite these challenges, the authorities have succeeded in preserving economic and financial stability, helped by a resilient economy—characterized by low inflation, sustainable debt, and ample international reserves. Economic developments and performance under the PSI have been positive. During a period of moderate growth, inflation has come down significantly from its 33 percent peak in 2011; and despite a decline in international reserves and a pickup in public debt, both remain at comfortable levels. Policies have strongly responded to the last Article IV recommendations (Box 1). Recent program performance has been positive, with all end-December 2014 quantitative assessment criteria (QAC) met. However, the lower inner limit of the inflation consultation clause was breached triggering consultations with staff. The indicative target (IT) on tax revenue was met by a substantial margin. The reduction in the stock of domestic arrears was smaller than targeted reflecting a decision to backload intra-year repayments, but the annual target is expected to be met. Contracting of nonconcessional borrowing (NCB) for hydropower plants (HPPs), roads, and electrification was within the $2.2 billion limit. Most end-March ITs were met. Management (PFM) Act in November 2014 was a major milestone, and structural benchmarks on finalizing preparation on its regulations and the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility (CFR) were observed. The Treasury Single Account (TSA) set-up has laid the stage for improved cash management although more time will be needed to eliminate movements of cash and incorporate donor accounts in the system. The submission to parliament of amendments to the Bank of Uganda (BoU) Act was postponed. Over the medium term, the government is committed to boosting sustainable growth to generate employment. This will require bolstering public and private investment with a more targeted focus on inclusiveness. To this end, the government has started the implementation of an ambitious investment package aimed at narrowing the infrastructure gap, enhancing regional integration, and preparing for oil production. The acceleration of private investment is expected to entail PPP schemes for strategic projects; and reforms to deepen financial markets, encourage credit growth, and make bank credit more accessible and affordable. Improvements in governance and the business environment are set to support this framework. Structural reforms have progressed steadily. The approval of the Public Financial Page 11 Box 1. Response to 2013 Article IV Consultation’s Key Recommendations Preserving macroeconomic stability. Moderate growth, low inflation, and comfortable reserves have underpinned favorable economic conditions. Strengthening public financial management. The legal framework for improving budget credibility and execution, and a TSA to boost cash controls were set up. Payment and payroll systems were upgraded. Domestic arrears are declining. Enhancing tax revenue. The authorities eliminated many tax exemptions, and efforts are ongoing to modernize tax administration. Additional action is needed to raise tax collection. Refining the inflation targeting framework. With the use of better forecasting techniques, monetary policy formulation has improved. The government has recapitalized the BoU with marketable securities reinforcing its instrument independence. Further operational and institutional reforms are being considered. Improving the business environment to better prepare the economy for oil production. Public sector operations are more transparent. Clearer tax and licensing rules bring favorable oil production prospects. Shortcomings in doing business and governance indicators remain. Strengthening implementation capacity. Capacity constraints still limit execution of public investment projects, and delays are frequent. Guidelines to improve investment decisions are being prepared. Deepening the financial sector and making it more inclusive. The system is sound and dominated by banks. Private sector credit has recovered, but a structurally low deposit base is insufficient to contribute to development financing.