PUBLIC INVESTMENT In the last few years, the fiscal deficit has widened and has been largely domestically financed. The overall deficit increased by 2 percent of GDP between FY2011/12 and FY2014/15. While grants declined by ¾ percentage points, tax and non-tax revenue picked up by 1¾ percentage points, and total spending by 3 percentage points (with significantly larger increases in capital than current outlays). Given the substantial decline in concessionally financed external loans, the deficit was financed almost exclusively from domestic sources, mainly through issuances of securities in the market and use of government savings. This illustrates the falling importance of external support in deficit financing. Only 12 percent of total expenditure and net lending is expected to be financed by loans and grants this year, compared to 45-50 percent a decade earlier. Page 23 Fiscal Revenue and Expenditure (percent of GDP) Over the medium term, the deficit is set to expand further, with spending tilted more towards capital outlays, and the bulk of financing coming from external sources. The overall deficit is projected to increase by an additional 2½ percentage points by FY2017/18 fueled by a continued expansion in capital spending (3¾ percentage points) and a small increase in current spending (¼ percentage point), and curtailed by a further improvement in revenues of at least ½ percent of GDP each year. Financing of the deficit is expected to pivot away from domestic sources towards external borrowing on non-concessional but favorable terms. Staff welcomed the changing deficit structure and financing, which will result in a higher fiscal multiplier, and will create space for private sector credit growth. For FY2014/15, buoyant revenues, savings from the elimination of ghost workers, and delays in HPP implementation should keep the overall deficit well below the budget limit. The strong revenue measures, alongside tax administration enhancements, are likely to result in a 1 percent increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio (½ percent in the program), a significantly better than expected outcome. At the same time, spending on HPPs was almost 2 percent of GDP lower than originally anticipated, as delays in negotiating loan repayment mechanisms slowed progress. Against this backdrop, the supplementary budget used part of the windfall revenue and expenditure savings to cover operational shortfalls at several ministries, and Electoral Commission outlays, among other pressing needs. All in all, the overall fiscal deficit is now projected to reach 4½ percent of GDP (6¾ percent in the program) and issuances of securities in the domestic market should remain within the target. While supporting efforts to keep domestic financing contained, staff expressed concern about investment delays, which can be costly, and about reallocating spending away from development expenditure. The authorities indicated that more time was needed to get assurances on the commercial viability of the projects, and committed to preserving spending in social sectors in the future. The FY2015/16 budget will increase the overall fiscal deficit to 7 percent of GDP, largely financed by NCB on favorable terms. The budget was approved on May 30 in line with the provisions of the PFM Act that call for approval before the fiscal year starts. The deficit expansion is explained by the boost in public investment, mainly for infrastructure financed by NCB with a grant element of about 11½ percent, and an increase in interest payments, partially offset by additional tax revenue gains. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is set to rise by 0.6 percentage points through policy measures and efficiency gains, including an increase in excise taxes (0.2 percent); an expansion in the scope of withholding taxes (0.1 percent); the imposition of the VAT on discounted taxable supply of services at fair market value (0.1 percent); an increase in fees and stamp duties (0.1 percent), and improved use of compliance data and better collaboration among ministries and the private sector (0.1 percent). *Other expenditure includes net lending minus HPP projects. Capital Expenditure includes HPP projects. Capital Expenditure Other Expenditure Non-tax Revenue Current Expenditure Tax Revenue Grants Source: Bank of Uganda and IMF Staff Calculations If HPPs and BoU recapitalization outlays are excluded, the deficit at 2¾ percent of GDP will be 1 percent of GDP lower than last year’s. Page 24 Figure 2. Uganda: Fiscal Developments and Outlook Fiscal consolidation is expected to continue… Fiscal Deficit (percent of GDP) Overall deficit excluding large infrastructure projects financed by non-concessional external borrowing and BoU recapitalization …through higher revenue mobilization… Total Revenue excluding Oil (percent of GDP) Other Revenue VAT Income tax …to provide space for increased infrastructure spending… Capital Expenditures (percent of GDP) New Infrastructure Projects Capital Expenditures …and ensuring public debt remains sustainable. Public Debt (percent of GDP) External public debt Domestic public debt Note: The underlying balance excludes the central bank recapitalization and large infrastructure projects financed by non-concessional external borrowing. Oil Revenue has also been excluded. …streamlining in non-interest current spending… Non-Interest Current Expenditures (percent of GDP) Other Wages …while containing domestic borrowing requirements… External financing (net) Domestic financing (net) 1 Petroleum and energy funds Government Financing (percent of GDP) Domestic financing excludes withdrawal of petroleum funds and energy funds and issuance of government securities for the recapitalization of Bank of Uganda. Sources: Bank of Uganda and IMF staff calculations Page 25 Staff urged the authorities to resist current spending pressures and implement infrastructure investment efficiently. The FY2015/16 budget is consistent with program objectives, but its successful implementation would require strong efforts to keep current expenditures within the budgeted amounts and proceed without further delays with the infrastructure plan. The contingency provision was reduced by 0.2 percent of GDP at the time of budget approval to facilitate one-off spending on police activities linked to the election and allowances to parliamentarians, leaving little budget flexibility and requiring prudent execution in the year ahead. The authorities agreed that the projected deficit expansion will be contingent on the materialization of the planned infrastructure projects, and committed to refrain from substituting them by other types of spending in case of delays. On the infrastructure program, staff reiterated the need to properly sequence projects while ensuring that they are selected on the basis of commercial viability and with awareness of implementation constraints. The authorities agreed and are developing new public investment management guidelines and procedures for this purpose.