Framework Allowing the exchange rate to adjust to its equilibrium level and increasing its flexibility thereafter is necessary for a sustainable correction of external imbalances. Staff considers it essential to allow the exchange rate to move to the level that would correct the estimated real overvaluation––taking into account the adjustment’s own effect on inflation––and enable the NBU to replenish its international reserves through market purchases. This adjustment should be accompanied by the introduction of a wide band around the new parity, within which the exchange rate should be allowed to float freely. With confidence in the new regime and the NBU’s ability to control inflation rising over time, the exchange rate band could be widened further and eventually abandoned with the formal introduction of inflation targeting (¶23). The exchange rate adjustment should be accompanied by tight policies to contain inflation. As inflation is currently near zero, it would remain manageable after the adjustment. Tight monetary policy, conducted through strict limits on the NBU’s NDA––while allowing adequate liquidity provision to banks early on––and positive policy interest rates in real terms will help contain the second round effects on private wages and inflation expectations. Tight fiscal policy (discussed below) will support monetary policy. Staff advised against extensive use of administrative foreign exchange controls as a substitute for the needed policy adjustment. To prop the overvalued exchange rate, Ukraine already uses various administrative measures designed to limit demand for foreign exchange and increase its supply, and has tended to intensify such measures at times of market tensions. However, they are costly for the economy and may be counterproductive if they thwart vital inter- company lending and diminish policy credibility. Staff advised the authorities not to intensify existing controls and begin to dismantle them gradually once a package of adjustment policies is in place. Staff also advised the NBU to eliminate the two remaining multiple currency practices described in the Informational Annex. Exporters are subject to a 50 percent surrender requirement on their earnings. Recently, the NBU extended the surrender requirement to a broader range of transactions. Conversion in hryvnia is required for all foreign exchange transfers from abroad to persons when the amount exceeds UAH 150,000 a month. A license is required for some foreign exchange transactions, including investment abroad. Page 13 Moving to a flexible exchange rate regime would require significant changes in the NBU monetary policy framework and eventual adoption of inflation targeting (IT). Staff has long recommended IT as the most suitable monetary policy framework for Ukraine given the NBU’s mandate to focus on price stability and the need to have an anchor under a flexible exchange rate. The NBU has made good technical progress in preparations for switching to IT. They have narrowed the interest rate corridor between their deposit and lending facilities and introduced an automatic overnight deposit facility, as recommended by Fund staff. Alongside, the authorities have been building up capacities for macroeconomic modeling and inflation forecasting. Staff assesses that once the high-level commitment to adopt the new framework is made, it could become operational within 12–18 months. To facilitate the transition, staff recommended enhancing further the tools for managing short-term interest rates and allowing banks additional flexibility in managing their liquidity (Annex V). The new tools would strengthen the interest rate-based monetary policy transmission via the interbank money market in preparation for transitioning away from exchange rate and money anchors. The NBU was in favor of gradually increasing exchange rate flexibility. However, they expressed concern about possible market disruptions following the switch to the new regime, and preferred to do so as part of a comprehensive adjustment program. Moreover, the NBU considered that a modest exchange rate move would be sufficient to reduce the current account deficit to a sustainable level, which they viewed to be about 5–6 percent of GDP. At the same time, the NBU stressed the importance of foreign exchange controls for maintaining steady supply of foreign exchange to the market and discouraging speculative pressures on the exchange rate in the current difficult situation. Staff noted that a current account deficit of 5–6 percent of GDP would keep international reserves declining as external financing necessary to cover such a deficit has not been available to Ukraine since 2010 (Table 3). Even if such financing were to appear, the already high external liabilities would keep rising fast, and reserve coverage of debt would remain precariously low. The NBU agreed with the benefits of a monetary policy framework based on interest rate management, and with a gradual transition to IT in the medium term.