Under current policies, the combined general government-Naftogaz deficit is projected to rise sharply in 2013 and remain elevated in 2014. Staff projects the budget deficit at 5¾ percent of GDP in 2013, including 1¼ percent of GDP in recognized tax refund and expenditure arrears to be covered by promissory notes (Table 2). The combined general government-Naftogaz deficit will expand to 7¾ percent of GDP in 2013. The large tax cuts currently envisaged in the tax code would have further raised the combined deficit to 8½ percent of GDP in 2014, had the authorities not decided to reconsider them (see below). While the current level of public debt is still moderate, it is projected to rise further and is subject to considerable risks. Under the baseline, public debt is projected to exceed 40 percent of GDP in 2013 and approach 60 percent of GDP in the medium term (Annex III). Substantial gross external financing requirements would expose Ukraine to significant rollover and exchange rate risks. Large contingent liabilities generated by generous use of government guarantees, promissory notes, and Naftogaz’s actual and potential obligations present substantial risks as well. Staff urged the authorities to embark on fiscal consolidation as part of the adjustment package. To support the external adjustment and stave off the acute financing risks (Annex VI), staff recommended a general government deficit target of 2¾ percent of GDP in 2014, falling to 1¾ percent of GDP in the medium term (text table). Including the effects of the energy sector reform, the combined budget-Naftogaz structural deficit would fall by 2¾ percent of GDP in 2014 and 4 percent by 2018. The frontloading of the fiscal adjustment is necessary to (i) support the external adjustment; (ii) contain inflation; and (iii) reduce the budget’s acute financing needs, a key The tax code envisages cuts in the value-added tax (VAT) rate from 20 to 17 percent and corporate income tax (CIT) rate from 19 to 16 percent. 20112012201320142015201620172018General government balance 1/ -2.8-4.5-5.7-4.6-4.7-6.5-6.3-6.3Overall balance (including Naftogaz's deficit)-4.3-5.5-7.7-6.6-6.3-8.0-7.7-7.6Structural general government balance-3.0-4.5-4.1-4.1-4.5-6.4-6.3-6.3Structural general government and Naftogaz balance-4.6-6.8-6.0-6.1-6.0-7.9-7.7-7.6General government balance 1/-2.8-4.5-5.7-2.7-2.3-2.2-2.0-1.7Overall balance (including Naftogaz's deficit)-4.3-5.5-7.7-4.0-3.2-2.8-2.2-2.0Structural general government balance-3.0-4.5-4.1-1.9-1.9-2.0-2.0-1.7Structural general government and Naftogaz balance-4.6-6.8-6.0-3.2-2.9-2.6-2.2-2.0 Sources: Ukrainian Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The general government includes the central and local governments and the social funds. In 2013, the general government deficit includes recognized arrears (1.3 percent of GDP). Fiscal Balances Under the Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios, 2011 Baseline scenarioAdjustment scenario Page 17 vulnerability. In the short term, the fiscal consolidation will exert an inevitable but moderate drag on domestic demand and growth, partly offset by the boost in net exports. In the medium term, the moderate deficit would stop crowding out bank lending to the economy, reduce pressures on the NBU balance sheet, and help stabilize public debt below the generally accepted for emerging markets benchmark of 40 percent of GDP, opening fiscal space for countercyclical policies. The brunt of the fiscal consolidation should fall on reducing current expenditure. In 2014, high budget expenditure (about 50 percent of GDP) should be reduced by rationalizing public procurement, reducing subsidies, restraining public sector wages and hiring, and indexing pensions only with inflation, removing the recently introduced wage-linked indexation component. These policies will begin reversing the unaffordable wage and pension hikes of previous years. Over the medium term, staff recommended current expenditure cuts of some 6¾ percent of GDP through continuing wage and employment restraint, pension reforms with a focus on privileged pensions, and deeper subsidy cuts made feasible by the energy sector reform (Annex VII). This will return current expenditure just below its 2011 level and allow doubling capital outlays to 3 percent of GDP––the minimum necessary to maintain public infrastructure Staff strongly cautioned against unaffordable and untimely tax cuts and distortionary substitutions. The authorities were considering proposing to parliament to postpone the scheduled cuts in the VAT and CIT from 2014 to 2016. Staff argued that any tax cuts should be postponed until the needed adjustment in current expenditure was well under way and the budget deficit reduced to a sustainable level. Once this is done, tax cuts that best support growth should be given priority. On this basis, staff supported the intention to postpone the cut in the CIT rate to 2016, but advised abandoning altogether the plan to cut the VAT rate, as this is unlikely to be affordable given the need to reduce the budget deficit. Staff also advised against the contemplated re-introduction of a tax on non-cash foreign exchange purchases, abolished in 2011 due to its distortionary impact on financial intermediation. Instead, staff recommended phasing out existing VAT exemptions, especially in agriculture, and supported plans for a five-year schedule for raising excise taxes, starting in 2014. The recent revision of Ukraine’s tax treaty with Cyprus and the introduction of a law on transfer pricing have some revenue-raising potential, although estimated gains seem optimistic. Staff cautioned against the use of promissory notes to settle arrears. Staff welcomed recognition of existing arrears, but stressed that these should be settled through conventional methods such as cash payments and netting the due refunds against VAT liabilities. Staffs emphasized that the issuance of promissory notes to clear arrears would undermine future budget and Naftogaz revenue and impose deep haircuts on legitimate business receivables. The authorities broadly agreed with the need to frontload fiscal consolidation and reduce the general government deficit below 3 percent in 2014, but were yet in the process of shaping key policies to achieve that. They argued for a consolidation strategy based on a combination of expenditure and revenue measures. Given the large and highly rigid social component of total expenditures––which they found hard to change––the authorities considered the amount of proposed medium-term current expenditure consolidation difficult to implement. On tax issues, the authorities agreed that the scheduled cuts in VAT and CIT rates may adversely affect Page 18 macroeconomic stability in 2014, and committed to proposing to parliament their postponement until 2016. At the same time, they argued that the reduction in VAT rate may help reduce the shadow economy and should not be abandoned altogether. The authorities also acknowledged that reducing tax exemptions to the agricultural sector was long overdue and could generate large savings, but highlighted political difficulties associated with this reform. The authorities emphasized that the acceptance of promissory notes will be voluntary and agreed to settle obligations in cash should there be no demand for such notes. Staff emphasized the importance of reforms to modernize the institutional framework of fiscal policy and limit accumulation of fiscal risks. These reforms would support macroeconomic stability following the adjustment and should include: (i) a fiscal rule to anchor the budget deficit consistent with medium-term macroeconomic stability; (ii) a medium-term budget framework with binding expenditure ceilings supporting the authorities’ policy objectives; and (iii) a rigorous and transparent process for selecting public investment projects—both on-budget and state-guaranteed––with the highest economic rate of return. In this regard, staff recommended limiting state guarantees to 1 percent of GDP per year to stem the rapid buildup of contingent liabilities and consequent upward pressures on government borrowing costs. The authorities felt that state guarantees were important to attract long- term investments to the economy. They explained that the recently created special committee to oversee investment projects seeking support through state guarantees has strengthened the project selection mechanism to minimize contingent liability risks. However, they noted practical difficulties associated with the adoption of a medium-term budget framework given large uncertainties about the macroeconomic outlook.