A pick up in agriculture and rising external demand in partner countries should support a modest recovery from late 2013 on. The good agriculture performance will likely lead to an exit from the recession in 2013:Q4. However, GDP would still decline by ¼ percent in 2013 as weak industrial production and construction will outweigh the output boost from agriculture. Under currently planned policies, a modest growth of about 1 percent is expected in 2014, driven by improvements in external demand, strong grain exports, and continuing consumption expansion, while saving and investment would decline further. After hovering around zero in 2013, inflation would modestly rise to about 2 percent in 2014. The current account deficit would remain elevated above 8 percent of GDP in 2013–14, as the pick-up in demand would largely offset the export boost. However, the current policy mix would sustain large imbalances and depress growth. An overvalued exchange rate and large fiscal and quasi-fiscal deficits would keep the current account deficit above 7 percent of GDP over the medium term, well above its estimated equilibrium level (Annex I). Even assuming that external financing remains at historical levels, which cannot be guaranteed, the depletion of the NBU’s international reserves will continue unabated (Table 3). Remaining buffers and sporadic financing opportunities could allow maintaining stability for a while, but they would not be able to prevent an eventual market-forced adjustment if current policies remain in place. Meanwhile, the tight monetary policy in support of the exchange rate would keep constraining private investment, while public investment would be further displaced by high wage and pension spending. High labor costs relative to productivity would limit employment growth. Together with the difficult business climate, these factors would keep actual and potential growth depressed. The risk of a costly market-forced adjustment is high. The decline in international reserves could trigger a run for foreign exchange, leading to a disruptive exchange rate shock that would compress demand, raise inflation, and hit banks. This risk could be exacerbated by (i) sustained loss of market access caused by the ongoing reappraisal of emerging market risk and Ukraine’s deteriorating fundamentals; (ii) a more restrictive trade regime with Russia that could lead to sizable export losses; and/or (iii) loss of confidence in government policies as their focus alternates between integration with the EU and Russia. Other global and local risks cloud the outlook as well (Annex II). On the upside, the possible––if postponed––signing of an association agreement with the EU could help exports and spur FDI over time, with potential gains magnified once competitiveness and the business climate are significantly improved. Russia accounts for about ¼ of Ukrainian exports, mainly base metals and machinery. Most of these exports are now exempt from customs duties under CIS and bilateral agreements. Page 10