The economy has been in recession since mid-2012. Although a 15 percent budget wage hike in 2012 boosted private consumption, weak external demand and falling investment dragged activity down after the positive effects of co-hosting the Euro 2012 Soccer Cup had dissipated (chart below). GDP contracted by 1.3 percent y-o-y in January–September 2013, but unemployment remains below its long-term average at 7.5 percent in mid-2013 (Figure 2). Consumer prices stayed Ukraine and Selected Peers: Real Gross Domestic Product (Index, 2007=100) Russia Poland Turkey Source: HaverAnalytics. Page 6 flat in 2013 (Figure 3), held down by falling food prices and tight monetary policy. The 12-month rolling current account deficit was 8 percent of GDP by end-September 2013, essentially unchanged from end-2012 despite the 22 percent reduction in natural gas imports in January–September 2013 (Figure 4). Tight monetary policy has stemmed pressures on the foreign exchange market. In late 2012, devaluation expectations rose and demand for foreign currency spiked. Defending the exchange rate, the NBU intervened heavily, intensified foreign exchange controls, and squeezed bank liquidity. This prompted banks to raise deposit and lending rates and tighten credit conditions, exacerbating the recession. Persistent devaluation expectations and zero inflation kept real hryvnia interest rates in double digits (Annex III). The high rates prompted a 30 percent increase of hryvnia deposits in the year to September 2013. The banks used deposit inflows mainly to buy government securities and repay loans to the NBU, while credit to the economy expanded only by 7 percent y-o-y. Private balance sheets have maintained their moderate short foreign currency position since end-2012, with both loans and deposits in foreign exchange stagnating. In an attempt to relax monetary conditions while safeguarding reserves, the NBU lowered its main policy rate from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent over the summer but raised the reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits by several percentage points. Ukraine’s market access has become much more difficult and international reserves are running low. In two Eurobond issues in early 2013, Ukraine raised US$2.25 billion at yields of about 7½ percent. Since late May, yields have hovered in the 8½–15 percent range. This led the NBU monthly FX interventions (RHS, USD billions) Devaluation expectations (percent) 1/ Sources: NBU; Bloomberg; and staff estimates. 1/ Derived from 12-month NDF contracts on hryvnia. Ukraine: Devaluation Expectations and NBU Interventions, 2011-13 Contribution to Real GDP Growth, 2008–13 (Percent; year-on-year) Sources: State Statistics Committee; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Difference between GDP growth and sum of components accounted for by taxes minus subsidies. 2/ Industry includes mining, manufacturing, and energy. Production Side 1/ Services Construction Industry 2/ Agriculture GDP growth Expenditure Side Net exports Investment Public consumption Private consumption GDP growth Page 7 authorities to postpone further Eurobond issuance, while tapping domestic banks and NBU’s international reserves for financing in foreign currencies. The recent downgrades of the sovereign by Moody’s to Caa1 and S&P and Fitch to B- led to renewed spikes in the bond and CDS spreads (Figure 4); the bond yield curve inverted. By end-October, reserves fell to about 2.5 months of imports and 36 percent of debt service in 2014. Meanwhile, foreign banks have continued to reduce their exposure to Ukraine, but this has been more than offset in 2013 by asset repatriation by domestic banks to purchase government US$-denominated bonds. The fiscal stance loosened in 2012, contributing to the buildup of vulnerabilities. Large pension and wage increases, generous energy subsidies, and soccer cup spending led to a widening of the general government deficit to 4½ percent of GDP in 2012, an expansion of 1½ percent of GDP in structural terms. The combined structural deficit of the government and the state-owned company Naftogaz, a perennial source of quasi-fiscal losses, rose to 6¾ percent. To cope with fiscal pressures, the authorities have been increasingly resorting to off- balance sheet activity, non-cash settlements, and low quality measures. As rising wage and entitlement spending squeezes the budget, the authorities are trying to buoy public investment by extending large amounts of state guarantees. In 2012, the guarantees exceeded 5 percent of GDP, and could reach up to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2013 according to the budget law, although only about 0.7 percent of GDP has been allocated by end-October. In October, the parliament approved the use of the so-called promissory notes (government IOUs) for about 1¼ percent of GDP for repayment of overdue VAT refunds and expenditure arrears. The notes would be accepted as payments to Naftogaz. Finally, as budget revenue has been falling short of expectations, the central government has cut transfers to local governments and postponed low-priority budget spending. Energy-related quasi-fiscal losses are mounting and large contingent liabilities may be looming. Despite lower gas imports, Naftogaz’s losses in 2013:H1 more than doubled. The losses are generated by very low prices on sales to households and district heating companies and declining share of sales to the profitable commercial enterprise market. Naftogaz’ shortage of funds has also led to delays in paying for gas imports despite restructuring of a US$2 billion loan from Russia’s Gazprombank. As reduced imports defy the “take-or-pay” terms of its contract, Gazprom has announced an US$7 billion claim on Naftogaz for 2012, but has not taken legal steps to collect. Ukraine’s future trade and economic relations with the EU and Russia are unclear. In August–October 2013, the Ukrainian authorities intensified their efforts to meet the conditions for signing an association and free trade agreement with the EU. In this context, Russia’s authorities announced that a free trade agreement with the EU would preclude Ukraine from participating in the regional Customs Union (including Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan). The Ukrainian authorities and businesses report that since August 2013, Russia’s authorities have been tightening customs procedures and controls for Ukrainian exports. Moreover, Russian officials have stated that to prevent re-export of EU goods to the Customs Union, the current essentially free trade regime with Ukraine may revert to WTO’s most favored nation status should Ukraine sign a free trade agreement with the EU. On November 21, the Ukrainian authorities unexpectedly suspended preparations for signing the agreement with the EU citing the need to sort out trade and economic relations with Page 8 Russia and the Customs Union first and calling for trilateral discussions between Ukraine, the EU, and Russia on the matter. As of the time of issuance of the staff report, the authorities’ further intentions regarding economic relations with the EU and Russia remain unclear. Meanwhile, the technical discussions on a possible new Fund-supported program continue. When the program supported by an SBA expired in December 2012 (Box 1), the authorities expressed their interest in a new arrangement with the Fund. Two missions visited Kyiv in early 2013, but the authorities were not able to commit to a set of policies that would adequately deal with Ukraine’s deep-seated problems. In the context of the 2013 Article IV consultations, the authorities re-affirmed their interest in an arrangement with the Fund. Technical discussions with staff are ongoing to ensure that policy commitments are sufficient to address Ukraine’s challenges. Box 1. Ukraine: Stand-By Arrangements in 2008–12 In November 2008, the Executive Board approved a two-year, SDR 11 billion SBA with Ukraine (802 percent of quota). The primary objectives of the SBA-supported program were macroeconomic stabilization and adjustment amid the heavy impact of the global economic crisis of 2008–09. The program mitigated the effects of the steep currency devaluation in late 2008, while still allowing the exchange rate to find its market-driven equilibrium that dramatically improved the external position of the country. The program also helped stabilize the banking system and created preconditions for economic recovery. However, little ownership and insufficiently strong policy implementation amid political turmoil prevented tackling fundamental structural and institutional weaknesses of the country (IMF Country Report 11/325). Under that arrangement, two reviews were completed and SDR 7 billion disbursed before it went off track and was cancelled in mid-2010 upon the approval of the next arrangement. In July 2010, the Executive Board approved a 29-month, SDR 10 billion (729 percent of quota) SBA. This SBA- supported program aimed to set public finances on a sustainable path, eliminate quasi-fiscal losses in the energy sector, facilitate transition to a flexible exchange rate regime, and further strengthen the financial sector. Its main achievements included a pension reform in 2011, initial energy tariff adjustments, and restoring international market access for Ukraine. Again, the authorities’ program policy ownership waned, particularly in the key areas of energy tariff adjustment and exchange rate flexibility, and only one review was successfully completed. Two purchases totaling SDR 2.25 billion were made before the program went off track in 2011 and expired in December 2012.