Incomplete transition to a market economy holds back Ukraine’s economy. While significant progress has been made in establishing basic markets and reducing poverty, extensive state presence in the economy––a large state budget, distorting price regulation, and pervasive governance deficiencies––weighs heavily on economic growth, deterring the best use of abundant natural and human resources. The recovery from the global crisis in 2008–09, which hit Ukraine particularly hard, has been lagging behind that of peers (Figure 1). Progress with structural reforms has been slow (Figure 7) and the business climate–– although improved in some areas––is considered difficult by local and foreign businesses alike. Inconsistent macroeconomic policies generate deep-seated vulnerabilities and recurrent crises. Ukraine has long relied on an effectively pegged exchange rate as a nominal anchor, accompanied by loose fiscal policy and sizable quasi-fiscal losses ultimately covered by the budget (and monetized by the NBU, which holds over 60 percent of domestic government debt). This policy mix results in an overvalued exchange rate, large twin deficits, a steady rise in indebtedness, recurrent difficulties with external financing, and low international reserves. Such vulnerabilities make the economy especially susceptible to external shocks and balance of payments crises, as in 1998 and 2008–09. Political polarization, the upcoming presidential elections, and pressures from vested interests limit the authorities’ policy space . The ruling coalition led by the Party of Regions remains in power after the parliamentary elections in October 2012. The majority and the opposition have cooperated in passing legislation necessary for concluding the association agreement with the EU. However, the unexpected government decision to suspend preparations for signing the agreement as planned on November 29 prompted large-scale mass protests not seen since 2004. Tensions remain high and may increase further in the run-up to the presidential elections in March 2015. Vested interests, notably in the energy sector, continue to act as a drag on needed reforms.