Advancing structural reforms and improving the business climate is imperative for unlocking Ukraine’s growth potential. Progress in this area has been mixed, with improvements in the area of starting a business, registering property, and paying taxes, but remaining inefficiencies in institutional capacity and business regulations. The mixed record is reflected in competitiveness ratings. On the one hand, Ukraine rapidly advanced in the 2014 Doing Business report (by 28 ranks to 112 th place out of 189 countries); on the other hand, it lost ground in the 2013–14 Global Competitiveness Index. Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to improve the legal framework for governance and business climate, but emphasized that the uneven implementation of laws and regulations remains a drag on business activity, private investment, and technology transfer. As a consequence, the productivity potential of the economy remains suppressed and competitiveness and FDI inflows compare unfavorably against regional peers. Overall, most domestic business persons and international observers agree that comprehensive and far-reaching improvements in business climate and governance are needed to attract investment and support economic growth. Staff recommended a focus on structural reforms addressing the binding constraints to growth, which are generally in the areas where Ukraine lags behind its regional peers (Figure 7 and Annex IX). This includes strengthening the judicial system, simplifying or repealing Page 21 burdensome government regulations, and stepping up anti-corruption measures. The authorities are undertaking welcome measures to reduce excessive regulation, pass anti-corruption legislation, and address judicial weaknesses as part of the work on the association agreement with the EU. These efforts need to continue in a decisive and comprehensive manner, with equally strong emphasis put on implementation and execution of law and regulations. In this regard, staff recommended: (i) ensuring timely and fair resolution of commercial disputes by improving the efficiency and governance in the judicial system; (ii) establishing an independent business ombudsman, as recommended by a number of business organizations and IFIs, to respond to concerns about unfair business practices and advocate swift action to resolve such concerns; (iii) strengthening administrative, judicial and operational capacity to protect property rights; (iv) imposing clear and consistent rules in tax administration and continuing to address delays in VAT refunds through conventional measures; and (v) making the recently reformed corporate insolvency framework operational. Decisive progress in these areas should raise productivity and private investment, substantially lifting potential growth in the medium term. Staff recommends further strengthening the regulatory and operational framework for anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). The assessment done in 2009 by Moneyval, the regional body assessing compliance with AML/CFT standards, revealed flaws in the Ukrainian legal framework, and the progress report submitted to Moneyval in December 2012 confirmed that some of those flaws remained in place. In particular, there are shortcomings in proper customer due diligence requirements on ultimate beneficial owners of legal persons, which are crucial to detect potentially illicit funds. Furthermore, there is no explicit requirement to check the source of wealth/funds of owners (including beneficial owners) of qualifying holdings of banks. In this context, staff advised the NBU to expedite the work on draft amendments to the AML/CFT law in line with FATF recommendations as well as ensure their prompt adoption and implementation. In addition, staff recommended to the NBU to set up more specific requirements to check the source of wealth/funds of the founders and owners of qualifying holdings of banks, including beneficial owners. The authorities agreed with the need to further improve the business climate and governance, and underscored that their reforms have significantly improved Ukraine’s standing in the World Bank Doing Business report. They focus on an ambitious deregulation process, as well as tax and custom administration reforms to create more business-friendly environment, as provided for in the President’s Reform Program for 2010–14 and the Program to Accelerate Economic Development for 2013–14. Regarding the AML/CFT agenda, the authorities are in the process of incorporating the latest FATF requirements in their legislation and operational regulations, and hope that their progress in this regard will be noted in the next assessment by Moneyval now scheduled for May 2014. Page 22