The banking system appears stable at present, but vulnerabilities persist. The authorities have steered the economy through domestic market tensions at the end of 2012, and confidence in the banking system has improved. A high average capital adequacy ratio of 18 percent provides some cushion against risks stemming from an elevated NPL ratio of 14 percent (Table 6). The NPLs are relatively well provisioned, with specific provisions covering 81 percent of impaired loans and 45 percent of doubtful loans, but the market value and liquidity of posted collateral are difficult to verify, and regulatory and tax impediments keep NPL resolution slow. At the same time, the NBU’s Resolution 109 continues to force the banking sector into a large negative foreign Including substandard loans in the definition of NPLs, in line with the best international practice, would raise the NPL ratio to over 25 percent. Page 14 exchange position of about 20 percent of capital by end-September 2013. Though significantly reduced since end-2012, this exposure still keeps banks vulnerable to a large exchange rate move. Moreover, banks’ uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook and access to NBU liquidity facilities forces them to seek liquidity by maintaining high deposit rates, with the resulting high lending rates limiting demand for credit. This constrains economic growth and limits banks’ ability to further build capital buffers out of their profits. Staff proposed to unwind Resolution 109 in a balanced way that reduces bank vulnerabilities without destabilizing the foreign exchange market Allowing the provisions against foreign currency loans back in the calculation of the foreign currency position over three years would generate only modest additional bank demand for foreign exchange and thus strike the right balance in this respect. To improve the banks’ foreign exchange position while also reducing their exposure to foreign exchange risk during the transition, staff recommended allowing all banks to include government exchange rate-indexed securities in the calculation of foreign currency assets. Further limited issuance of such securities will help as well, as it would help mitigate the impact of exchange rate devaluation on the banks at the expense of only minor additional cost for the government. Alongside, staff advised removing the remaining tax, administrative, and legal obstacles that prevent NPL resolution and corporate debt restructuring, such as the need to pay VAT when selling NPLs and the lack of out-of-court procedure to settle insolvency between defaulting borrowers and the involved banks. The NBU agreed to repeal Resolution 109 and gradually phase out its restrictions in three years, but wanted to start the process as part of a comprehensive adjustment program. Meanwhile, the NBU envisaged expanding the pilot project allowing banks to count government exchange rate-indexed securities as foreign currency assets and including provisions in foreign currencies up to the amount of the indexed bonds in the calculation of the foreign exchange position. Staff cautioned that while such securities do cushion the effect of an exchange rate move on banks’ balance sheets, this approach is not international best practice, as the indexed bonds cannot cover losses caused by possible write-offs of foreign currency loans. The NBU has set up a working group with representatives of relevant government agencies to identify impediments to NPL resolution and making recommendations for their removal. Even as the banking system appears capable of withstanding significant shocks, staff advised developing contingency and recovery plans. Stress tests conducted by staff suggest that even in case of significant––but still orderly––exchange rate depreciation, banks’ capital and liquidity needs will remain manageable. Nevertheless, detailed contingency plans focused on keeping NBU’s Resolution 109 excludes provisions in foreign currencies from the calculation of banks’ foreign exchange position. This artificially reduces banks’ foreign currency liabilities and forces the banks to keep their foreign currency assets low in order to comply with the NBU regulation on open foreign exchange positions. However, this policy amounts to requiring the banks to run a structural negative (short) economic open position, as their foreign exchange assets fall well short of their foreign exchange liabilities inclusive of provisions in foreign currencies. For example, stress tests on groups of banks covering credit and foreign exchange risks based on data for September 2013 indicate that a significant but orderly devaluation and the concomitant rise in NPLs would reduce bank capital by 2¼–4 percent of GDP. This would not generate recapitalization needs for most banks given existing (continued) Page 15 systemic banks sufficiently capitalized and the whole system liquid should help mitigate the impact of adverse shocks. The mission also recommended that systemically important banks be required to prepare recovery plans and the NBU, in coordination with the Deposit Guarantee Fund and the Ministry of Finance, develop specific resolution plans for the most vulnerable banks to be used in case of need. To dispel possible doubts about the strength of banks’ balance sheets and their adherence to reporting standards, staff advised the NBU to launch independent diagnostic audits of vulnerable systemic banks, focusing on asset quality, loan classification, provisioning, adequacy of loan collateral, and related party lending. Authorities’ views. The NBU agreed that the banking system can withstand mild shocks, but argued––on the basis of stress tests with extremely strong assumptions––that exchange rate moves of the magnitude implied by staff’s advice would generate very large capital needs. Staff acknowledged the need to be conservative when running stress tests, but noted that the NBU’s assumptions appear extreme in view of the macroeconomic situation expected to prevail after adjustment policies are put in place (Table 7) and international best practice. The NBU shared the view that independent audits of vulnerable systemic private banks would be useful, and––in cooperation with Fund and World Bank staff––has developed terms of reference for such audits and made other preparatory steps. Staff pointed out that the audits should go ahead as soon as possible, as they could provide useful input in the contingency and recovery plans mentioned above. Enhancing bank supervision and strengthening reporting standards should help reveal and address banking sector vulnerabilities. Despite improvement in banking supervision, significant weakness remain particularly regarding identification of true owners of banks, the sources of funding, and monitoring of connected lending and large exposures on consolidated basis. While the NBU appears to have the adequate authority and rules for consolidated supervision, its enforcement could be much more effective with more assertive supervisory regime. Staff encouraged the NBU to strengthen its financial stability and supervisory functions by prompt enforcement of consolidated bank supervision and improving their early warning system to ensure timely detection of problem banks and subject them to enhanced supervision. Staff also advised an acceleration of the process of resolving the three intervened banks in state possession, which is moving slowly. The NBU has adopted a new regulation for consolidation supervision and is working on making it fully operational. They pointed out the significant progres in transforming Rodovid (one of the three intervened banks) into a bad bank that would accept NPLs from the other two (Kiev bank and Ukrgaz bank). Currently they are in the process of selecting financial advisor to recommend how to dispose (through sale or merger) of Kiev bank and Ukrgaz bank. high capital buffers. Nevertheless, a few large banks would need to raise their capital somewhat in order to reach the minimum 10 percent capital adequacy ratio. Page 16