(As of October 31, 2016) Membership Status : Joined September 21, 1976 Article VIII General Resources Account SDR Millions % Quota Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department SDR Millions % Allocation Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans SDR Millions % Allocation ECF Arrangement Latest Financial Arrangements Type ECF SAF Date of Arrangement Sep. 21, 2009 Jun. 21, 1991 Formerly PRGF Expiration Date Dec. 23, 2013 Jun. 20, 1994 Amount Approved (SDR Million) Amount Drawn (SDR Million) Overdue Obligations and Projected Payments to Fund (SDR millions; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Forthcoming Principal Charges/interest Total When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such arrears will be shown in this section. Page 62 Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Enhanced framework I. Commitment of HIPC assistance Decision point date July 2010 Assistance committed by all creditors (US$ Million) Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million) (SDR equivalent in millions) Completion point date December 2012 II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR Million) Assistance disbursed to the member Interim Assistance Completion Point balance Additional disbursement of interest income Total disbursements Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the decision point. Hence these two amounts cannot be added. Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim period. Summary of Safeguards Assessment. The last safeguards assessment was conducted in 2010. The BCC continues to publish its annual audited financial statements, but has not yet implemented International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The assessment also recommended that the bank establish an internal audit function, progress on which has been slow. IX. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): Not applicable. Exchange Rate Arrangements: The currency of Comoros is the Comorian franc, which is pegged to the Euro at €1 = CF 492. Comoros has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2( ), 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Page 63 Article IV Consultation The last Article IV consultation was concluded on February 4, 2015 (Country Report No. 15/34). Directors welcomed Comoros’s improved policy implementation and economic performance in recent years. However, they noted that significant challenges remained - including high poverty, inadequate infrastructure, and vulnerabilities characteristic of small island economies. They saw achieving fiscal stability as a key near-term objective, encouraging the authorities to strike a better balance between available resources and expenditures and calling for efforts to strengthen revenue mobilization and public financial management by implementing quick-win reforms in both areas. Directors also cautioned against excessive reliance on the potentially volatile proceeds from the Economic Citizenship Program. They further stressed the need to develop the financial sector and expedite the pace of structural reforms in order to boost external competitiveness and growth prospects. Recent Technical Assistance Department Date LEG, AFS AFS, MCM STA Oct-14 Jan-15 Jan-15 Mar-15 May-15 Jul-15 Aug-15 Oct-15 FAD/AFS Mar-16 STA, AFS STA Apr-16 Apr-16 Apr-16 Jun-16 Subject Assist authorities designing, developing & implementing taxpayer register Strengthening Banking Supervision and Regulation Budget Preparation Manual Budget Preparation and Presentation Cash Management Cash Management Cash Management and Government Banking Arrangements Cash Management Cash Management and Government Banking Arrangements Building Macro Fiscal Capabilities Customs Tax Legislation Customs Administration Risk Based Supervision Bank Supervision and Regulation Balance of Payments Statistics Treasury Single Account TADAT Assessment of the Comoros Tax Authority Strengthen Customs Control on Non-Petroleum Excisable Goods Including Exemptions Revisions to the Banking Law and Strengthening the Operational Framework for Monetary Policy Bank Restructuring National Accounts Government Finance Statistics Page 64 FAD/AFS Jun-16 Jul-16 Development of Customs Code Regulations - Offsite Revenue Administration Resident Representative: A resident representative post established in September 1991 was closed in December 1995; in the 2000s, the IMF’s field operations in the country were managed by the resident office in Madagascar. The Comoros post was reestablished in May 2012. Page 65