The current account deficit has risen substantially in recent years, reaching 5.2 percent of GDP in 2015 (Table 6)—the widest deficit among advanced economies . The increase has been due almost entirely to a weaker income balance. Part of this decline could reflect structural factors, such as the UK’s increasingly favorable corporate tax rates attracting more inward FDI, thereby reducing the stock of net FDI and in turn the income derived from it. However, part of the decline in the income balance may also be temporary, reflecting factors such as unusually low returns on British investments abroad (see 2015 Selected Issues and Annex 1). The current account was wider than justified by fundamentals in 2015, and sterling appeared overvalued (Annex 1) EU structural fund transactions have not been a main driver of the decline in the income balance. K EE J X W KK H Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Current Account Balance, 2015 Page 13 The EBA current account regression model yields a cyclically adjusted current account balance of -4.8 percent of GDP in 2015 and a current account norm of -0.6 percent of GDP, implying a current account gap of -4.2 percent of GDP and sterling overvaluation of 18 percent. However, the post-crisis deterioration in the income balance is not expected to be entirely permanent, suggesting a somewhat smaller underlying current account deficit and smaller current account gap than implied by the EBA current account model. Taking into account this effect, as well as the somewhat smaller gaps implied by the EBA REER models—both of which estimate overvaluation of 12 percent—and adding uncertainty around these estimates yields an estimated current account gap of -1.5 to -4.5 percent of GDP and REER overvaluation of 5–20 percent in 2015. However, as of April 2016, the REER had depreciated by 7 percent relative to its average 2015 level, possibly unwinding a portion of the estimated overvaluation in 2015. Part of the estimated current account gap (1.1 percentage points) reflects the fiscal balance currently being looser than its optimal medium-term level. Part of the gap also reflects a relatively low household saving rate, which fell to 4.3 percent in 2015 (Table 2). It is important to note that this external assessment and the estimated degree of overvaluation in 2015 are conditional on the baseline scenario in which the UK remains in the EU. An alternative scenario entailing higher trade barriers could reduce the equilibrium exchange rate (as a more competitive exchange rate would be required to raise demand for UK exports to offset the reduced demand from the EU due to higher barriers), implying that additional depreciation from 2015 levels—beyond that implied by staff’s assessment of overvalution in 2015—would be required to restore equilibrium in such a scenario. Some factors mitigate risks associated with the current account deficit . In particular, the BoE’s well-established inflation-targeting framework should help keep inflation expectations anchored in the event that an unwinding of the current account deficit leads to exchange rate depreciation, absent a major regime shift such as an exit from the EU, which would pose a higher risk of de-stabilizing inflation expectations. In addition, the currency composition of the net international investment position (NIIP) helps act as an automatic stabilizer, as foreign assets have a higher foreign-currency component than do foreign liabilities, such that sterling depreciation automatically improves the NIIP and income flows via valuation effects. A variety of valuation effects have also kept the NIIP at a relatively neutral level (-3.5 percent of GDP at end-2015; Table 7) despite persistent large current account deficits in recent years, and the authorities estimate that the NIIP would be higher if FDI were fully valued at market prices. Nonetheless, the high and persistent current account deficit is a source of concern . The deficit’s sheer size and its general usefulness as an indicator of underlying imbalances and heightened risks suggests some cause for caution. Although the UK has not had difficulties in ApproachOvervaluation (percent) Current Account Regression18REER Index Regression12REER Level Regression12Source: IMF staff calculation. UK: Estimated Exchange Rate Overvaluation under Different EBA Approaches Page 14 financing its deficits so far, events could change market sentiment, triggering abrupt capital outflows. Rapid outflows could in turn adversely affect domestic investment and hence growth, with negative outward spillovers via cross-border linkages. A persistent, high current account deficit is thus best avoided, and policies that assist orderly and gradual external adjustment would be helpful.