The macroeconomic outlook is positive . Economic growth is expected to be about 4¾ percent in 2014 and 4½ percent in coming years. Driving economic growth, the nonhydrocarbon economy is expected to grow at about 5½ percent this year and beyond, supported by public investment projects and strength in services sectors such as tourism, logistics, finance, and real estate. An improving global economy and strengthening domestic confidence, associated with a rebounding real estate market, recently announced megaprojects, and the Expo 2020, also support nonhydrocarbon growth. By contrast, growth in hydrocarbon production will likely be limited in the context of an amply supplied global oil market. Inflation is expected to increase, driven by higher rents. The current account is set to further decrease, reflecting a projected moderate decline in hydrocarbon prices and continued import growth. Page 8 Domestic and external conditions pose risks to the largely favorable medium-term outlook (see risk assessment matrix). The strengthening real estate cycle, particularly in the Dubai residential market, could attract increased—and potentially destabilizing—speculative demand, creating the risk of unsustainable price dynamics and an eventual, potentially disruptive correction. An acceleration of the Dubai megaprojects, currently planned to be flexible and in line with projected demand, could exacerbate this risk. Moreover, the projects could weaken Dubai’s still substantially indebted GREs: Dubai’s total government and GRE debt is estimated at $142 billion (141 percent of Dubai GDP) with $92 billion falling due in 2014–19. With rent controls recently relaxed, rising real estate prices may also feed more strongly into inflation. External risks also remain important. A sustained decline in oil prices, which could be triggered by deceleration of global demand or coming-on-stream of new supply, would reduce export earnings and fiscal revenues. The UAE’s substantial foreign assets and fiscal surplus provide buffers against moderate or short-lived shocks. But a large and prolonged fall in oil prices would reverse the accumulation of savings and ultimately result in lower fiscal spending. Renewed global financial market volatility could increase interest costs for the Dubai government and its GREs. By contrast, heightened geopolitical risks surrounding Russia and Ukraine or the Middle East could raise global energy prices and support the UAE’s external position, though a deeper deterioration could disrupt global financial and trade flows. A permanent easing of international sanctions on Iran could benefit the UAE by allowing the resumption of closer economic and financial linkages.   Page 9 Nature of Risks/ ( Likelihood) Sustained decline in commodity prices triggered by deceleration of global demand (in advanced or emerging economies) and coming- on-stream of excess capacity (medium-term) (Medium) Insufficient domestic policy reform to mitigate the risk of real estate boom-bust cycles (Medium) United Arab Emirates: Risk Assessment Matrix Expected Impact on Economy if Risk is Realized/ (Low/Medium/High) Policy Responses to Reduce Vulnerabilities Lower oil prices would reduce export earnings and fiscal revenues. The UAE’s substantial foreign assets and improving fiscal position provide buffers against moderate or short-lived shocks. But a large and prolonged fall in oil prices would reverse the accumulation of savings and ultimately result in lower fiscal spending. (High) Continue with fiscal consolidation. Mitigate Dubai’s fiscal vulnerabilities by deleveraging and reforming GREs. Continue to diversify the economy and explore options to increase the revenue base. Renewed optimism, fueled by capital inflows and rising real estate prices, could prompt increased speculative demand and a new cycle of risk-taking and re-leveraging by GREs and private companies, spurring a boom-and-bust cycle. (High) Consider targeted increases in real estate–related fees. Continue strengthening the macroprudential framework. Develop adequate mechanisms for prioritizing and sequencing major projects, and for assessing the quality of planned spending. Contain GREs’ risk- taking, improve their risk management, reporting, and governance. For a temporary shock, fiscal policy could be used to counter the impact of slower growth in emerging economies. For a long- lasting shock, the authorities should continue with fiscal consolidation, particularly in Dubai. A moderate increase in interest rates would benefit the UAE as a countercyclical measure. In case of a strong reversal of capital flows, the CBU should stand ready to provide liquidity to banks. A transfer of ailing GREs’ debt to domestic banks should be avoided. Emerging Asia, especially India and China, account for a large and growing share of UAE nonhydrocarbon exports. A slowdown in emerging economies would lead to lower oil prices, weaken an important driver of nonhydrocarbon goods export growth, and reduce tourism and foreign real estate demand. (Medium) Renewed phases of financial market volatility could trigger a sustained reversal of capital flows, an increase in risk premiums, and tighter liquidity conditions for the Dubai government and its GREs. GREs’ potential financial problems could spill over to the domestic banking system, given their strong interconnectedness. (Medium) Protracted period of slower growth in emerging economies due to earlier maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms. (High) Surges in global financial market volatility triggered by geopolitical tensions or revised market expectations on exit from unconventional monetary policies/emerging market fundamentals (High) ¹The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). Page 10