The authorities have achieved substantial fiscal consolidation over the last five years . The overall deficit has been halved, falling from 10 percent of GDP in FY09/10 to 5 percent of GDP in FY14/15. Nonetheless, both 20162020Consensus forecast2.32.3…Nov 2015 Autumn Statement (OBR)2.42.3-0.7Nov 2015 Inflation Report (BoE)2.5…-0.5Staff projection2.22.2-0.2Sources: OBR; IMF staff projections.Growth2015 Output Gap UK: Growth and Output Gap Projections Page 15 the deficit and debt ratio remain high relative to those in other advanced economies. Consolidation has been achieved primarily by spending restraint (Figure 3). The authorities plan to continue gradual fiscal consolidation over the medium term The consolidation plan aims for gradual deficit reduction and an eventual surplus by FY19/20 (Figure 3, Table 3). As a result, the gross debt ratio is expected to decline steadily over the medium term (Annex 5). Consolidation will continue to rely mostly on spending restraint, especially for certain departments (e.g., Communities and Local Government). Selected priority areas will remain protected, including spending on the National Health Service, which will continue to increase every year in real terms, and foreign development assistance, which will be maintained at 0.7 percent of gross national income. Key revenue measures include changes to social insurance contributions and to dividend tax. Relative to the last pre-election budget (March 2015), the authorities’ latest fiscal plans as announced in the 2015 Autumn Statement envisage a smoother path of deficit reduction. Consolidation is also now based somewhat less on spending cuts than previously projected, partly due to revised revenue and interest expenditure projections and new revenue measures. The consolidation path is appropriate in the baseline scenario . Continued consolidation is needed to rebuild buffers, thereby allowing more aggressive countercyclical policy during the next recession. Such an approach should yield net gains, as fiscal multipliers are likely lower now than they will be during the next recession, given that the output gap is nearly closed and that monetary policy over the next few years would likely be tighter in the absence of fiscal consolidation. The policy mix of tight fiscal and accommodative monetary policies should also support external adjustment. 2015 March Budget 2015 Autumn Statement Staff projection UK: Pace of Fiscal Consolidation (Change in cyclically adjusted primary balance, percent of GDP)Sources: Office for Budget Responsibility;and IMF staff calculations. Page 16 However, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate freely, and the fiscal path may need to be eased if growth slows markedly . The stabilizers should operate symmetrically in response to small deviations of a cyclical nature. In the event of an extended period of sluggish demand growth—for example, if private investment is less robust than projected in the baseline— the flexibility in the fiscal framework (see below) should also be used to modify the pace of structural adjustment. In addition, the envisaged reductions in some categories of expenditure remain sizable, and the government may need to show flexibility in finding alternative fiscal measures if anticipated spending efficiency gains fail to materialize. Pro-growth and pro-stability aspects of the consolidation could be further strengthened . Specific reform options along these lines include the following: Scaling back distortionary tax expenditures (e.g., nonstandard zero VAT rates) could improve efficiency, increase tax neutrality, and free up resources for other uses. Such uses could include higher spending on priority items such as infrastructure, given that needs in this area are still high despite recent increases in capital spending relative to previous projections. Such priority items could also be funded by phasing out the “triple-lock” for pensions, which guarantees that state pensions rise each year by the highest of CPI inflation, wage inflation, or 2.5 percent. This approach is costly, poorly targeted to those most in need, and inconsistent with international best practice, which is generally to maintain a constant real income in retirement via indexation only to the CPI. Property tax reform, along the lines recommended in the Mirrlees Review , could help reduce vulnerabilities in the housing market by easing supply constraints. For example, rebalancing taxation away from transactions and towards property values could boost mobility and encourage more efficient use of the housing stock. Reducing council tax discounts for single- occupant properties could also increase the utilization of these properties (see companion paper). Reducing the tax code’s bias toward debt could also promote financial stability. This could be achieved by, for example, adopting an Allowance for Corporate Equity, with offsetting changes in other corporate tax parameters to ensure revenue neutrality. The fiscal framework has been revised . Consistent with the medium-term fiscal plans, the authorities have adopted a new fiscal rule requiring a budget surplus, starting in FY19/20, as long as rolling 4Q on 4Q GDP growth exceeds 1 percent. Once projected growth falls below 1 percent, the rule allows the government to run a deficit until conditions allow a return to surplus. The rule is not a strictly binding one (as, for example, if it were enshrined in a constitution), but instead effectively Page 17 operates on a “comply or explain” basis, adding another degree of flexibility. The rule is supplemented by a target for public sector net debt to fall as a percent of GDP in every year to FY19/20. The authorities recently announced plans to start producing a regular analysis of fiscal risks . In mid-2015, the government undertook a review of the OBR to reflect on lessons learned during its five years of existence. The review concluded that the OBR was functioning well, but made some recommendations to further strengthen its operations. One of the key recommendations was for the OBR to start preparing a new report on fiscal risks, as recommend by the IMF’s Fiscal Transparency Code. The OBR plans to produce the first such report within the next two years. Authorities’ views The authorities viewed their fiscal plans as helping to bolster fiscal resilience and improve public-sector efficiency . They emphasized that responsible fiscal policy should rebuild buffers to allow for the fact that the UK economy will continue to be hit by shocks in the future. They agreed with the need to maintain flexibility in the event of large shocks, but noted that the new fiscal framework covered most contingencies in this regard, as UK growth has exhibited a “bi-modal” tendency in which it has been either relatively strong (e.g., growth above 2¼ percent) or sufficiently weak that it would trigger the 1 percent escape clause (see text chart). The authorities stressed that the composition of consolidation aimed to support a competitive low-tax economic environment and prioritize efficiency gains, while continuing to provide high-quality outputs in key areas such as science, infrastructure, education, and health. In this regard, they emphasized that the pace of real cuts in departmental spending was significantly slower than in the previous parliament.