The UK economy continued to expand steadily in 2015 . Output grew by 2.3 percent, the third straight year of growth in the 2–3 percent range. Growth has been driven by strong private domestic demand, which has more than offset headwinds from gradual fiscal consolidation and persistently weak external demand (Tables 1–2; Figure 1). Key indicators point to an ongoing post-crisis normalization of macroeconomic and macrofinancial conditions Standard models suggest that the output gap is now nearly closed, as capacity utilization and the unemployment rate have returned to pre-crisis levels (Figure 2) while the employment rate has reached a record high. Credit conditions continue to turn more expansionary, with net lending by monetary financial institutions (MFI) to nonfinancial corporates turning positive for the first time since the crisis— helping to support higher business investment in 2015—and with mortgage rates falling to new lows (Figure 3). 2012Q22013Q12013Q42014Q32015Q2 Nonfinancial businesses, total SMEs Large firms UK: MFI Net Lending to Nonfinancial Businesses (Y-o-y percent change) Source: Bank of England 2015Q4 Aged 16 to 64 Aged 65 and Over (rhs) UK: Employment Rate (Percent, SA) Source: Haver. Page 11 However, several factors heightened uncertainty in the first half of 2016 . Foremost among these is the referendum on EU membership. Volatility in global financial markets in early 2016 and downgrades to the global growth outlook alongside increasing concerns about global risks, such as secular stagnation in advanced economies, have further heightened uncertainty. Amidst this uncertainty, annual growth is expected to be slower in 2016 . Heightened uncertainty appears to be weighing on confidence and investment, with growth slowing to 1.6 percent (saar) in Q1 and PMI surveys suggesting a further slowdown in April. Under staff’s baseline, which is based on a scenario in which the UK remains in the EU, growth is projected to rebound somewhat in the second half of 2016 as lingering referendum-related effects dissipate, with growth reaching 1.9 percent for the full-year 2016. Growth is then projected to average around 2.2 percent—approximately staff’s estimate of the UK’s potential growth rate—over the medium term (Table 2) . However, medium-term growth prospects are heavily dependent on the degree to which labor productivity growth recovers. Labor productivity growth has been very weak in the UK during the recovery, recently running around 0.8 percent (Table 2). Part of the post-crisis decline in productivity growth likely reflects temporary cyclical factors, such as the post-crisis impairment of credit markets inhibiting the flow of investment to more productive sectors (see 2015 Selected Issues). As the economy nears full employment, employment growth should also ease, helping to raise productivity as tighter labor markets spur more efficient labor utilization and as employment growth is driven more by labor force growth and less by the hiring of the unemployed, who tend to have below-average productivity. However, part of the decline in productivity growth also likely reflects more permanent structural factors, given a broad-based productivity slowdown across most advanced economies that is not fully understood and may reflect factors such as changes in the nature of technological progress and/or increased difficulties in measuring it. As cyclical effects wane, staff projects productivity growth to rise over the medium term to around 1.6 percent but to remain well below its pre-crisis historical average of 2.2 percent (1960–2007). However, such projections are uncertain, and moderate deviations could result in substantial differences in output levels over the long run. From a demand-side perspective, a number of offsetting forces are expected to have a roughly neutral effect on growth over the next few years . Growth in the baseline is expected to be supported by a reduction in uncertainty following a Remain vote, by the recent run-up in 300400500600Jan-05Jan-07Jan-09Jan-11Jan-13Jan-15 UK: News-Based Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (Mean=100)Sources: Economic Uncertainty Index; and Haver.Apr-16 Page 12 residential and commercial real estate prices (encouraging investment in these sectors), and by gradually rising global growth (supporting net exports), with ongoing monetary policy accommodation and supportive financial conditions helping to offset broadly unchanged headwinds from steady fiscal consolidation (Table 3). Inflationary pressures remain subdued As of April 2016, headline inflation remained low at 0.3 percent; core inflation was also subdued at 1.2 percent. Low headline inflation partly reflects the large drop in commodity import prices since mid-2014. However, domestic drivers of inflation have also been muted, with nominal private-sector wages growing by only 2.3 percent as of March 2016 (Figure 1). Even if productivity growth remains in the range of only 0.8 percent, this pace of wage growth would still be consistent with underlying inflation of only around 1.5 percent. Consequently, markets do not expect the BoE to raise its policy rate (currently 0.5 percent) for several years. Under this scenario, staff expects inflation to rise gradually to 2 percent by early 2018, as effects from past commodity price declines dissipate and assuming a gradual rise in wage growth in response to tighter labor markets. A planned gradual increase in the minimum wage of 34 percent during 2015–20 will also contribute to higher wage and price inflation.