Monetary conditions remain accommodative . Current monetary policy settings—a policy rate of 0.5 percent and QE assets of £375 billion (20 percent of GDP)—have been unchanged since Monetary policy should stay on hold until inflationary pressures are clearer Both headline and core inflation are below target. Forward-looking indicators—such as inflation expectations and wage growth in excess of productivity growth—are also well-contained, with market-based inflation expectations continuing to drift downward in recent months (Figure 1). While the output gap is nearly closed, continued monetary policy accommodation is likely to be needed to keep the output gap from re-opening, given headwinds from ongoing fiscal consolidation. In addition, the very low level of long- term interest rates (the 30-year yield on government bonds was 2.2 percent as of end-May) suggests that the neutral interest rate may be much lower than in the past. Consequently, the current policy rate may not be providing as much monetary stimulus as it may initially appear. 1M6M2Y4Y6Y8Y10Y15Y25Y40Y UK: Sovereign Yield Curve Source: Bloomberg. Page 21 Moreover, risks to policy errors are asymmetric, as the costs associated with inflation undershooting likely exceed those of overshooting due to the increased complications related to easing monetary policy when interest rates are near the effective lower bound. Current monetary policy settings thus remain appropriate until inflationary pressures become stronger. However, policy should also stay data dependent and may need to adjust quickly if conditions change. If upside risks are realized, monetary tightening may need to be initiated earlier than expected, especially if core inflation or wage growth in excess of productivity growth rises quickly. On the other hand, further easing—which could take the form of policy rate cuts to at least zero, possibly in steps and followed if necessary by additional quantitative easing—is likely to be necessary if demand is weaker than expected and inflation undershooting persists. Authorities’ views Monetary policy settings were viewed as appropriate . When the MPC judges it appropriate to raise Bank Rate, careful communication will be important to ensure a smooth lift-off. The BoE reiterated that the process of normalizing monetary policy should begin with rises in Bank Rate and proceed gradually—with the neutral rate likely to remain below levels seen prior to the financial crisis—and that QE asset sales should only be considered once Bank Rate had reached a level from which it could be cut materially in the face of a negative shock. The authorities agreed that in the event of protracted weak demand and price growth there was some scope to further ease monetary policy through cuts to policy rates, further quantitative easing, or a combination of the two.