Further policy action is needed to address potential risks from the real estate market, particularly in case of continued rapid house price increases . The situation in the real estate market is different from 2008 in that price increases still partially reflect a recovery from the post- crisis trough and demand (stemming to a large extent from foreign buyers) is significantly less bank- financed. Nonetheless, by some measures, nominal residential real estate prices in Dubai have already reached their 2008 peak. The rapid pace of price increases, if continued, could trigger an intensification of destabilizing speculative demand, and thus warrants close monitoring. With the majority of residential real estate purchases being cash-based, fee-based measures are likely to be Page 12 most effective in addressing speculation. The increase in Dubai’s real estate registration fee from 2 percent to 4 percent last October, along with regulatory measures to assure orderly market conditions for new real estate development, was a welcome step. Staff and the authorities agreed that imposing additional fees and restrictions on reselling off-plan properties would further discourage speculative demand. In addition, staff recommended setting higher fees for reselling properties within a relatively short time. Recently imposed macroprudential regulations are supporting these efforts . The new maximum loan-to-value ratios for mortgage lending and debt-service-to-income limits provide banks with a buffer against undue exposures, while also helping to limit speculation. Staff recommended that the CBU should further tighten these rules if real estate price increases remain very high and if growth in real estate lending increases. GREs should closely coordinate and prioritize planned projects to avoid an exaggerated supply response . Upcoming real estate and hospitality projects will be planned and executed, to a large extent, by GREs. Staff recommended that these projects should continue to be executed gradually and in line with expected demand, which will require close coordination and oversight. Care should also be taken to prevent GRE activities from crowding out private sector activity. Moreover, as some GREs are still highly indebted, it will be important to continue managing upcoming debt repayments proactively, including using timely communication to guide market expectations. Continued improvements in the availability of information on Dubai GRE debt, including on the terms of asset transfers among GREs, and in their risk management, reporting, and governance, will be important to facilitate a further strengthening of GRE balance sheets. The authorities agreed with the need for further policy actions in the real estate sector and stressed their intention to further strengthen the GREs. They agreed that further measures, including higher, targeted fees, may be needed to address potential speculative real estate demand. While they felt that the recently introduced macroprudential regulations are sufficiently comprehensive in the current situation, they agreed with the need to review these if real estate prices continue to increase rapidly, and particularly if lending to the real estate sector should pick up more markedly. They pointed out their intention to execute the new megaprojects gradually, keeping their plans flexible and in line with demographic forecasts. With respect to servicing the GREs’ debt, the authorities noted that GREs have been actively looking at refinancing options, prepaying debt before maturity, diversifying funding sources, and extending maturities, taking advantage of the low-interest-rate environment. They also stressed that most GREs are financially The new regulation limits first-time mortgage loans for expatriates to 75 per cent (65 percent) of a property's value that is worth less than AED5 million (more than AED5 million). For Emiratis, the limit is kept at 80 per cent (70 percent) of the property value if it is worth less than AED5 million (more than AED5 million). For subsequent property purchases, expatriates are eligible to take loans up to 60 per cent of a property's value while UAE nationals are allowed up to 65 per cent, regardless of the value of the property. For off-plan properties, all mortgages are restricted to 50 per cent. Monthly repayments cannot exceed 50 per cent of a borrower's monthly income, and the total loan amount cannot be larger than seven years' annual income in the case of an expatriate and eight years' annual income for a national. Page 13 healthy, and that they aim at strengthening the commercial viability of the remaining GREs. The authorities also pointed to improvements in transparency of the GREs, with those that are listed or that issue debt disclosing their financials. UAE: Liquidity Coverage Ratio In the context of a strong cyclical position and accelerating deposit growth, a continued focus on the health of the banking system is warranted . The CBU conducted stress tests to assess risks to the banking system. Liquidity stress tests implied that eight (mostly small) banks would fall below a 60 percent liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) under narrow application of the new Basel III standards; however, the CBU pointed out that the forthcoming customization of the rules to the UAE context (see below) will provide a more accurate assessment with fewer banks likely to be below the threshold. Solvency stress tests with increases in sectoral NPLs ranging from 50 percent to 130 percent resulted in only one bank with a Tier 1 capital ratio below 8 percent. The CBU recently introduced loan concentration limits for GREs and local governments, which will help contain risks to banks’ balance sheets from planned megaprojects. It will now be important to agree, as planned, on transition paths for banks that exceed the new limits, while avoiding any further build-up of exposures in these banks. LCR ratio Number of banks with LCR less than 60% Number of banks with LCR less than 100% Source: CBU estimates. As of end-March 2014 Abu Dhabi Banks Local Banks Dubai Banks (Percent) Credit Risk Stress Testing for UAE Banks (in Percent) UAE Local Banks Tier 1 capital Regulatory capital Regulatory Abu Dhabi Banks Tier 1 capital capital At end-February 2014 CAR NPL ratio Stress scenario 1/ 2/ NPL ratio CAR Dubai Banks Regulatory capital Tier 1 capital Number of banks below the minimum regulatory capital Memorandum items Minimum regulatory capital Source: CBU estimates. 1/Increases in sectoral NPLs range from 50 to 130 percent. 2/ The assumed increases in NPLs are provisioned using January 2014 total provision rates (except in the construction, real estate, and retail sectors, which use a 70 percent provision rate). LCR stress tests are highly sensitive to the liquidity and runoff assumptions assigned to assets and liabilities. The new regulation limits exposures to emirate governments and their noncommercial entities to 100 percent of bank capital, with a 25 percent individual exposure limit to noncommercial entities. Commercial entities of the Federal and Emirate governments also face a 100 percent aggregate and a 25 percent individual exposure limit. Overall, the exposure to a single borrower or a group of related borrowers is limited to 25 percent of bank capital. Banks exceeding the exposure limits were required to submit, to the central bank, plans for reducing their excess exposures by at least 20 percent annually, thus complying with the limits within five years. Page 14 Amid ongoing monitoring of risks, strengthening the CBU’s supervisory toolkit would help bolster the stability of the financial system further. Staff stressed the importance of ongoing monitoring and reporting of risks, including through the CBU’s financial stability reports. In this context, staff welcomed the CBU’s efforts to establish a financial stability stress index to identify risks and vulnerabilities. Staff recommended further strengthening the toolkit available for enforcing bank supervision through improvements to the sanction framework, and the authorities noted that this would be done in the context of the forthcoming Financial Services Law. More broadly, an assessment under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) could play an important role in further strengthening the CBU as banking system regulator and supervisor, and other regulatory and supervisory agencies, while facilitating further financial sector development. The authorities have stepped up the implementation of Basel III. They are planning to phase in Basel III capital and liquidity standards over 2015–19, and are consulting with banks about technical issues such as the definition of high-quality liquid assets, and about a simple liquidity rule for smaller banks. In light of the significant liquidity and capital in the banking system, the CBU felt that banks would be able to comply with the new standards. Staff stressed the importance of assuring the independence of banks’ decision making amid significant interconnectedness among bank, GRE, and private enterprise board members. Adherence to best practices in corporate governance and risk management is needed to safeguard the independence of banks’ decision making. Staff recommended strict enforcement of existing corporate governance rules—and tightening rules where weaknesses are identified—for banks and GREs to address potential conflicts of interest (Box 5). Given the open nature of the economy and its geographic location, continued focus on measures to mitigate risks stemming from money laundering is warranted. Increasing flows from abroad, channeled to the banking sector and financial, real estate, and gold markets, including through trade, create potential vulnerabilities related to possible illicit financial flows. Continuing to strengthen the regime for anti-money-laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) is essential to mitigate these risks. Following the adoption of the 2002 AML law, the establishment of the AML suspicious cases unit in the CBU, and its increasing engagement in international cooperation, amended AML legislation will come into force shortly. Staff recommended areas for further improvement in the AML/CFT framework. Once the legislative and regulatory framework is upgraded, efforts should focus on conducting a national risk assessment and strengthening the role of the supervisors of financial and nonfinancial businesses and professions, including real estate agents, to ensure that they adequately apply preventive measures including reporting of suspicious transactions commensurate with their risks. More broadly, staff encouraged the authorities to continue improving their understanding of the origins of financial flows and making further refinements to the identification of the beneficial owners of deposits and loans in the UAE. An AML/CFT assessment in the context of the FSAP would help define priority areas for further improvements. The authorities stressed their strong efforts in the area of AML/CFT, including domestic regulation and international cooperation. Page 15