Economic growth has been solid, supported by tourism, hospitality, and a rebounding real estate sector . While growth in oil production moderated in 2013, public projects in Abu Dhabi and robust growth in Dubai’s service sectors continued to underpin growth, which reached 5.2 percent in 2013. The current account surplus declined to 16 percent of GDP (from 18½ percent in 2012), reflecting buoyant imports. The real estate sector has been recovering quickly in some segments, especially in the Dubai residential market. While the momentum of price increases appears to have slowed in recent months, sales prices nonetheless increased 27 percent year-over- year in May 2014 (Box 1). With this increase only gradually feeding into higher average rents, headline inflation increased to 1.9 percent year-on-year in March 2014 (from 1 percent a year ago). Strong financial market performance also reflects improved confidence . The Dubai Financial Market (DFM) stock index rose by 100 percent year-over-year in May 2014, in part supported by the UAE’s inclusion in MSCI’s emerging markets index. Credit default swap spreads have further tightened. Foreign capital flows, particularly to domestic banks, have risen (Box 2). Fiscal consolidation slowed in 2013 . The fiscal stance tightened by around 1 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP, about half of what had been expected. While the Dubai government reduced its deficit slightly faster than planned, Abu Dhabi’s consolidation was less than budgeted, driven by higher security, defense, and other current spending. The overall fiscal surplus is estimated to have declined, however, to 6.5 percent of GDP (from 8.9 percent of GDP in 2012), raising the estimated fiscal breakeven oil price to US$84, from US$78 in 2012. Private sector credit has begun to recover . Deposit growth has strengthened, boosting liquidity in the banking system. Following years of credit-less recovery, lending to the private sector has begun to rebound (8.2 percent year-over-year growth in 2013, and further accelerating in the first quarter of 2014). Banks continued to increase their exposure to government and public enterprises, by AED15 billion (equivalent to 6 percent of bank capital) during 2013, in some cases further increasing their already substantial loan concentration. Banks remain amply capitalized, and nonperforming loans (NPLs) have begun declining from their post-crisis peak, though they remain high, especially among Dubai banks. Source: Dubai Land Department. In mid-2013, MSCI announced the reclassification of the UAE from its Frontier Markets Index to its Emerging Markets Index as of June 2014, triggering increased demand by investors that track this index. The fiscal stance, measuring the fiscal impulse on aggregate demand, is defined as the consolidated nonhydrocarbon primary balance for the federal, Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah budgets, including loans and equity but excluding (i) the operations of Dubai Financial Support Fund, (ii) the investment income from the sovereign wealth funds, and (iii) grants to foreign governments. The breakeven oil price is the oil price that would be needed to balance the consolidated budget of the federation and the emirates. Page 7 Bank Financial Soundness Indicators (percent) 2013 Mar-14 Capital adequacy ratio Return on assets Return on equity Nonperforming loans to total loans Provisions to nonperforming loans Source: Country authorities. National banks. Specific and general provisions. Solid economic growth, combined with higher real estate prices and a liquid banking system, has helped indebted GREs . With the debt restructuring of Dubai Group in January ($10 billion), reportedly at a large net present value (NPV) haircut for creditors, the last major restructuring from the 2008/9 crisis has been completed. In addition, $20 billion in Dubai government debt to the Central Bank of the UAE (CBU) and Abu Dhabi falling due this year was rolled over at reduced interest rates. Nakheel has begun to prepay bank debt falling due in 2015. Dubai World has stepped up asset sales (sometimes to other GREs) to raise cash and repay debt under its debt restructuring agreement, though markets continue to monitor Dubai World’s capacity to make forthcoming repayments. Financially healthy GREs have stepped up debt issuance (Figure 3). Abu Dhabi kept its total government and GRE debt contained.