The baseline scenario is subject to several risks . In the near term, risks to growth are somewhat tilted to the downside, taking into account also the downturn in global asset markets in early 2016. Specific risks are elaborated upon in the Risk Assessment Matrix (Annex 2) and include the following: Globally originating risks Global downturn . Weak global growth and/or sharp declines in global asset prices would depress near-term growth in the UK. For example, simulations suggest that the Global Asset Market Disruption scenario outlined in the IMF’s most recent Global Financial Stability Report would reduce output by 2.3 percent relative to the baseline scenario by 2017 (Annex 3). China and emerging markets (EMs) . A sharp slowdown in China and other EMs would likely have only limited effects via trade channels, as they account for only 4 and 13 percent of UK exports, respectively. However, financial sector linkages are somewhat stronger, with system-wide exposures to China and Hong Kong SAR equal to about 150 percent of system-wide CET1 in mid-2015. Nonetheless, the BoE’s stress tests released in December 2015 indicate that the UK banking system’s core functions can withstand a severe downturn in China and EMs along with lower growth in the euro area. UK-specific risks Medium-term productivity growth . Despite the recent pick up, productivity growth remains far below its historical average, and the degree to which it will recover over the medium term remains highly uncertain. If productivity growth is lower than expected, this would have large adverse implications for medium-term output and incomes. Real estate market-related risks . Housing and mortgage markets have decelerated somewhat over the last year, and lenders have become more resilient. Nonetheless, house-price growth continues to outpace income growth, and household leverage remains high by historical standards. A leverage-driven re-acceleration of the market would further increase households and banks’ vulnerabilities to house-price, income, and interest-rate shocks. Commercial real estate prices also continue to rise rapidly, and a market correction could reduce business investment and tighten corporate credit constraints, given lower collateral values (see later sections for further details on real estate market developments). Referendum on EU membership . The government is currently renegotiating the terms of the UK’s membership in the EU, seeking changes such as increased leeway to limit benefits for new immigrants and an opt-out for the UK from the objective of “ever closer union”. Following these Page 14 negotiations, the government plans to put membership in the EU to a referendum as early as 2016 and no later than end-2017. Quantifying how a decision to leave the EU would affect the economy is difficult, given that (i) the terms of staying in the EU are still being negotiated and (ii) the nature of post-exit relations with the EU are unknown. However, analysts have raised concerns that the exit debate could bring a period of uncertainty that could weigh on investment. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s baseline outlook and list of key risks . The authorities expected steady growth to continue over the next few years. The independent Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) and the BoE were both slightly more optimistic than staff on the degree to which productivity would recover over the medium term, resulting in somewhat higher growth projections, though the authorities agreed that uncertainty about productivity growth remained large and was a key risk. Staff’s external assessment was viewed as reasonable. However, the authorities noted that the external stock position remained relatively sound, not least because BoE analysis showed that it would still be positive if all external assets and liabilities were measured at market value.