Structural reforms are an important complement to other macroeconomic policies. UK goods and labor markets are some of the most competitive among advanced economies, with few major barriers to entry. Nevertheless, structural reforms in certain key areas could help boost potential growth, improve competitiveness and thus assist external adjustment, and help address regional disparities. Structural reform priorities include the following: Fiscal structural reforms . As elaborated upon in the fiscal section, priorities include tax reform, pension reform, and boosting investment in infrastructure. On the latter, transport bottlenecks constraining domestic regional development and external trade are especially notable. Recent efforts to boost infrastructure spending, including the formation last year of a nonpartisan National Infrastructure Commission, whose mandate is to lay out long-term plans for northern connectivity, London transport, and energy policy and to depoliticize the process, are thus welcome. Housing supply . As elaborated upon in the section on real estate market developments, efforts should continue to further boost housing supply, including by easing planning restrictions, mobilizing unused publicly-owned lands for construction, and reforming property taxes to encourage more efficient use of the housing stock. Boosting housing supply is an important macroeconomic objective, because it supports growth by fostering construction, lubricates the labor market by facilitating mobility, and bolsters financial stability by increasing home affordability, thereby reducing households’ need to take on high debt. Vocational training . Only four-fifths of those aged 15–19 are enrolled in education, below the OECD average and indicating scope for boosting human capital. For example, further expanding vocational training could help reduce double-digit youth unemployment and make growth more inclusive. In this regard, recent support for apprenticeship programs is welcome. Female labor force participation . Ongoing efforts to increase labor force participation for single women with children, which has been increasing in recent years but is still below the OECD average, should continue, including increased support for childcare. SS H K W X M X UU Y SS K H M Source: OECD Family Database, 2013. 1/ 15-64 years old with at least one dependent child, 0-14. Employment Rate for Single Parent Women 1/ (Percent) Page 34 Corporate transparency The government recently adopted a comprehensive set of reforms to enhance corporate transparency and combat tax evasion, corruption, and other financial crimes but more should be done . Among other measures, these reforms include the establishment of a register of people with significant control (i.e., beneficial ownership) of UK companies and limited liability partnerships and a new initiative for the automatic sharing of beneficial ownership information between countries. These reforms should be complemented by enhancing AML/CFT regulatory compliance among trust and company service providers, lawyers, and accountants, including by strengthening the effectiveness of their AML/CFT supervision. The government should further engage the Crown Dependencies (CDs) and British Overseas Territories (BOTs) on enhancing corporate transparency and access to beneficial ownership information. In setting their financial services and AML/CFT regulation, the CDs and BOTs with financial centers have committed to establishing central beneficial ownership registries, or equivalent systems, for entities incorporated in their jurisdictions. The government has also concluded arrangements with these CDs and BOTs on the effective and unrestricted access to this information by law enforcement and tax authorities. Key to the success of these initiatives will be ensuring the quality of beneficial ownership information contained in these registries, or equivalent systems, including by making them publicly accessible, through adequate enforcement, and by pursuing similar initiatives with respect to trusts. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s structural reform priorities and noted that significant actions had been taken in many of these areas . For example, the recently formed National Infrastructure Commission was expected to further strengthen the quality of infrastructure investment; much had already been done to boost housing supply, including significant reforms to the planning system, with the authorities committed to going further; childcare benefits had been adjusted in the 2015 Autumn Statement to support those on low incomes; and apprenticeship opportunities had been expanded. On enhancing transparency of beneficial ownership, the authorities noted that major reforms had been adopted over the past year, putting the UK at the forefront of such efforts. And, while the authorities were actively engaging with CDs and BOTs to strengthen transparency also in these jurisdictions, the authorities stressed that it was important to recognize that CDs and BOTs set their own their financial services and AML/CFT regulation, in line with self-governance arrangements.