The UK has a large, complex, and globally interconnected financial sector . Total financial assets of UK domiciled banks and nonbank financial institutions are about ten times UK GDP. Four banks and two insurers in the UK are classified as globally systemically important. The UK insurance sector is the largest in Europe and the third largest globally. The UK hosts the largest fund management industry and many of the most important equity trading platforms in Europe, as well as two of the largest central counterparties (CCPs) in the world. As such, effectively monitoring and mitigating risks impinging on and emanating from the UK’s financial sector is of crucial domestic and global importance. Against this background, IMF staff undertook an assessment of the UK’s financial sector in 2016 under the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), following up on the previous FSAP assessment in 2011. The main findings of the FSAP are summarized in the accompanying FSSA. The accompanying FSSA finds that the balance sheets of UK banks continue to strengthen, in line with tougher regulatory capital and liquidity requirements Since the global financial crisis, UK banks have significantly strengthened their capital ratios and liquidity positions (text table below, Figure 5). Indeed, the major UK banks had an aggregate common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 12.6 percent and an aggregate Basel III leverage ratio of 4.8 percent at end-2015, both well above regulatory minima. Capital ratios of UK banks were also broadly in line with those of their European peers. UK banks had an aggregate nonperforming loan ratio of 1.4 percent at end-2015, about a third of its post-crisis peak. Specific regulatory minima for CET1 and leverage ratios differ across banks, depending on their systemic importance. a t i Supplementary Leverage Ratio Source: SNL.1/ UK Banks include Barclays, LBG, RBS, and HSBC. European G-SIBs: CET1 and Leverage Ratios, 2015:Q4 (Percent; selected UK banks in red 1/) Page 26 As such, UK banks’ balance sheets are better able to support the real economy, with bank credit growth continuing to normalize and projected to converge to nominal GDP growth over the medium term (Table 2), now that the bank credit-to-GDP ratio has returned near pre-boom levels (i.e., circa 2000). Accommodative monetary policy has helped support this recovery in credit growth. Nevertheless, the profitability of UK banks remains low relative to historic levels, due to lower trading income, lower net interest income, and still-high legacy misconduct costs. As a result, the major UK banks were not immune to the reductions in equity prices and rises in CDS spreads that hit European banks on profitability concerns in early 2016. Recent stress tests suggest that the main subsectors of the UK financial sector are individually resilient to severe but plausible shocks Banks. Solvency stress tests conducted by the BoE in 2015 and by the IMF FSAP team in 2016 indicate that the major UK banks would continue to simultaneously satisfy regulatory capital requirements and domestic bank credit demand under severe but plausible adverse scenarios. The BoE stress test scenario considered a global macroeconomic downturn with financial market 2000-0620112012201320142015 2/ Capital adequacy Basel III common equity Tier 1 capital ratio…7.28.410.011.312.6Simple leverage ratio4.85.15.15.65.96.7Basel III leverage ratio (2014 proposal)…………4.44.8…………… Asset quality 1/ Non-performing loans net of provisions to capital…16.113.99.55.44.5Non-performing loans to total gross loans…4.03.63.11.81.4…………… Profitability Return on assets before tax1.10.40.20.30.50.4Price-to-book ratio224.657.081.0106.096.076.0…………… Liquidity Loan-to-deposit ratio113.1108.9103.199.195.996.7Short-term wholesale funding ratio…18.816.414.112.510.4Average senior CDS spread…2.71.51.00.60.8 Financial Soundness Indicators for Major UK Banks 1/ (Percent)Sources: BoE FPC Core Indicators, IMF Financial Soundness Indicators.1/ The coverage of banks is as defined in the BoE's December Financial Stability Report, except for asset quality indicators, for which the coverage is as defined in the IMF's Financial Soundness Indicators.2/ 2015 latest available data. Page 27 disruptions concentrated in emerging Asia and the euro area, while the IMF FSAP scenario featured a disorderly normalization of the stance of US monetary policy triggering abrupt asset price falls in the UK. Liquidity stress tests conducted in 2016 also indicate that the major UK banks are resilient to sizeable withdrawals of funding. Nonbank financial sector. Though not as detailed or comprehensive as the bank stress tests, separate analyses by the BoE, PRA, FCA, EU financial authorities, and the FSAP paint a relatively reassuring picture of the underlying strength and resilience of U.K. insurers, asset managers, and CCPs. In each of these areas, however, there is scope to improve the set of available data, analytical models, and supervisory risk monitoring tools. In spite of this individual resilience to shocks, interconnectedness across these subsectors of the UK financial sector has the potential to amplify and propagate destabilizing effects. Further developing analytical tools to assess risks due to interconnectedness should therefore be a priority. This apparent resilience of the UK financial sector largely reflects extensive regulatory reforms in the wake of the global financial crisis . These regulatory reforms were designed to increase the resilience of the UK financial sector by reducing the likelihood that financial institutions fail, while lowering the cost of failure to the economy and taxpayer. They have generally been aligned with the global regulatory reform agenda, in which the UK has played a leading role. They were also complemented by steps to enhance the governance of financial firms—a crucial step for restoring the confidence of the British public to the financial system—as well as to ring-fence retail banking operations from other, riskier activities. These reforms are well established in law—many are embedded in EU Directives and Regulations—although key components, such as ring-fencing, will require more time to be fully implemented. Key specific elements of the post-crisis regulatory reform agenda include reforms to strengthen macroprudential and microprudential oversight Macroprudential oversight. A new macroprudential framework, centered on the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), assigns clear roles and responsibilities, provides adequate powers and accountability, and promotes effective coordination across agencies. This institutional setup is well designed and has an encouraging, albeit still short, track record. Notable steps taken by the FPC include measures in mid-2014 to reduce risks related to the housing market and household debt (see next section on real estate markets for details). More recently, in March 2016 the FPC raised the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) from 0 to 0.5 percent, effective one year later. This CCB increase will not raise overall regulatory capital buffers for most banks in 2017 due to offsetting reductions in Pillar 2 supervisory capital buffers judged to cover overlapping risks. Rather, the FPC justified the CCB increase as desirable to improve the transparency of existing buffers rather than being needed to increase overall capital levels. Going forward, it will be important to continue tightening the CCB pro-actively in line with the financial cycle. In this regard, further tightening will likely be needed later this year if near-term uncertainty is resolved and macro-financial conditions remain stable, as assumed in staff’s baseline scenario. More generally, as the financial cycle shifts, external resistance to action is likely to rise, and resources Page 28 for financial stability issues could face competing demands. The authorities need to maintain their focus and willingness to act on financial stability risks, as well as continue their efforts to promote a better understanding by the general public of the FPC’s role and responsibilities. Microprudential oversight. The microprudential supervision of banks, insurers, and large investment firms was consolidated under the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) in the BoE, while the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is responsible for the microprudential supervision of other financial institutions and is the conduct supervisor for all financial institutions. The focus of supervisory effort and resources on the resilience of the most important firms is appropriate from a systemic perspective. However, it inevitably implies less individual attention to small and mid-size companies, for which supervisors rely more on data monitoring, thematic reviews, and outlier analysis. This tradeoff warrants constant vigilance, because the business models of smaller firms tend to be correlated and, regardless of their systemic impact, failures of even small firms can be a source of reputational risk for the supervisor. Going forward, it will be important to have a robust and intrusive approach to supervision as the financial cycle matures. This includes continuing to take a prudent approach to reviewing dividend payouts, intensifying on-site inspections and the scrutiny of asset quality on less systemically important banks, broadening and intensifying the supervisory review of banks’ internal models, and seeking international agreement on maintaining effective standards for risk-weights. The regulatory reform agenda has also focused on ensuring that financial institutions can fail in the UK without threatening financial stability or exposing taxpayers to losses The special resolution regime was overhauled in a series of steps, most recently through the transposition of the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive into UK law, and is now broadly aligned with international standards. The available resolution powers and tools are now much stronger than before the crisis, as are the coordination arrangements for crisis management, both domestically and cross-border. But remaining differences with resolution regimes in other jurisdictions could still impede orderly cross-border resolution, and the UK authorities are playing a leading role internationally in addressing this issue. The key challenge now is to complete the implementation of the revamped bank resolution framework in the UK, involving the introduction of ring-fencing requirements for the core retail activities of large banks, as well as the phasing-in of minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) for all banks. Going forward, continuous efforts will be required to ensure the resolvability of large, complex, and globally interconnected financial institutions as their business models evolve. Towards this end, the authorities should build on current arrangements to develop operational principles for funding of firms in resolution and should work with international partners to develop an effective resolution regime for insurance firms that could be systemically significant at the point of failure. The authorities should continue to improve their understanding of the scale and drivers of the “de-risking” phenomenon . Based on this analysis, the authorities should also develop tailored responses to mitigate potential adverse effects (Box 1). Page 29 Box 1. De-risking in the UK Global banks, including those based in the UK, have been scaling back correspondent banking relationships (CBRs) . While the number of CBRs has been declining, there are some indications that the global volume of transactions may be rising overall. Nonetheless, the curtailment of CBRs could potentially impair cross-border financial intermediation (including remittance transfers and trade finance) with certain jurisdictions and may cause customers and/or activities to migrate to less transparent and unregulated service providers. As part of this trend, UK global banks have been reviewing their customer base and business lines . As a result, certain categories of customers have had accounts terminated, notably money transmitters, non-profit organizations, FinTech firms, defense-related firms, and politically-exposed persons. Loss of accounts by money transmitters and non-profit organizations could potentially impair remittances, notably across the Somalia-UK corridor, and aid flows to conflict zones, creating spillover risks. The potential drivers behind the withdrawal of financial services are multiple . These drivers may relate to business strategy and/or cost-benefit analysis, including in the context of enforcement of regulatory obligations (e.g., capital and liquidity rules), AML/CFT, economic and trade sanctions, and tax transparency. In some instances, the withdrawal of services has been the result of conflicting regulations between jurisdictions (e.g., between data privacy and AML/CFT) that prevent correspondent banks from conducting adequate customer due diligence. Banks cited as a further factor the unevenness in the way international standards are applied and enforced globally, rather than the lack of clarity in the laws that implement the standards. The authorities have taken steps to understand the scale and drivers of these trends and have engaged with concerned stakeholders . Going forward, the authorities should continue these efforts to understand the issue and use this information to develop responses to mitigate potential adverse impacts, including by further promoting dialogue with stakeholders; encouraging banks to further work with their customers (e.g., respondent banks, money transmitters) on strengthening their AML/CFT controls; clarifying regulatory expectations, notably in regard to the management of higher risk customers; enhancing AML/CFT supervision of money transmitters; and working with other jurisdictions to resolve conflicting regulations that impede cross-border information-sharing between correspondent banks and their respondents. The authorities welcomed the analysis in the FSAP and broadly agreed with its main recommendations . They agreed that post-crisis reforms had significantly bolstered financial sector resilience, though challenges remain and financial sector supervision and regulation would need to remain vigilant as the financial cycle matured. The FPC expected to gradually raise the countercyclical capital buffer over time, as it considered a buffer of 1 percent to be the appropriate level for the normal phase of the financial cycle. The authorities also noted that non-traditional risks, such as those related to cyber-security, were gaining prominence and required close attention. On “de-risking,” the authorities agreed that it was important to better understand the drivers of this phenomenon and were undertaking substantial analysis in this area. Page 30