Housing markets have decelerated somewhat since mid-2014, but significant pressures remain House-price growth has eased from 12 percent (y/y) in mid-2014 to around 8 percent in late 2015. The percentage of new mortgages with high loan-to-value or high loan-to-income ratios has also declined (Figure 5). This moderate deceleration of housing and mortgage markets may partly reflect policy actions, including tougher mortgage lending requirements (the FCA’s Mortgage Market Review) and an FPC restriction that no more than 15 percent of a lender’s new mortgages be at or above a loan-to-income ratio of 4.5. Though the latter restriction was not binding for the vast majority of lenders, it may have had a signaling effect that prompted them to reduce high loan-to-income mortgages. Despite the recent slowdown, house prices are still rising faster than incomes. Consequently, the average price-to-income ratio is climbing back toward its pre-crisis peak and has exceeded it in London (Figure 5). Persistent upward pressure on house prices partly reflects supply constraints Restrictive planning regulations have long constrained supply, such that even the house-price boom of the early 2000s was not accompanied by the type of building surge seen in other countries such as Ireland and Spain. In addition, the crisis- induced shock to the construction industry has further constrained supply since 2008. Large builders consolidated and reduced employment, including of skilled workers, who are difficult to re- hire quickly. Several smaller builders exited the market, and some remaining ones have seen their financing conditions worsen. Together, these factors have helped prevent housing completions from keeping pace with new household formation since 2008. The rapid rise in house prices in recent years without an accompanying surge in net mortgage lending (Figure 5) further points to supply constraints as an important driver of the increase in prices. Banks account for over 90 percent of mortgage lending. New households Housing starts Housing completions UK: HouseholdFormation vs. Housing Construction (Thousands) Source: Haver. Page 25 High house prices result in some households taking on high leverage, posing financial stability risks . Despite recent declines, the percentage of new mortgages at high LTI ratios remains well above pre-boom (i.e., circa 2000) levels, as does the aggregate household debt-to-income ratio, which has stopped declining and is higher than in most other G7 countries. Such high leverage significantly exposes households and banks to interest-rate, income, and house-price shocks. Further macroprudential tightening may thus be needed if the reduction in high- leverage mortgages does not continue If needed, such tightening could take the form of tighter LTI and/or LTV limits on new mortgages. Priority should also be given to the consolidation of household-level credit data so as to allow a shift from LTI limits to debt-to-income limits, which cannot be evaded by taking out multiple loans. In addition, the authorities should extend the FPC’s powers of direction to the buy-to-let market, which has accounted for about one-third of gross mortgage growth since 2012 and is dominated by small-scale landlords (owning three properties or less), to avoid biasing the market toward this segment. The powers of direction should mirror those the FPC currently has over the owner-occupied market. Somewhat looser restrictions could be considered for borrowing for new construction to avoid unintentionally restricting supply. Other policies also affect housing demand . The authorities should continue to monitor the Help to Buy program and consider if it needs to be adjusted to avoid adding to demand for existing houses. In addition, continuing to carefully monitor beneficial ownership of legal entities and arrangements holding real estate is crucial for effectively implementing AML/CFT controls. Ongoing efforts to address supply constraints remain essential . Increased housing supply will support near-term growth, reduce the need for excessive household leverage, and promote social cohesion by lessening wealth inequality, as rising house prices have been a key contributor to the latter in the UK. The government has undertaken a number of welcome initiatives to boost housing supply in recent years, such as improving incentives for local governments to approve new construction. The authorities should remain vigilant against local-level resistance to effective implementation of these initiatives—otherwise the risks associated with an approval process perceived by many to be slow and unpredictable will remain. The authorities should continue efforts to mobilize unused publicly-owned lands for construction and explore ways in which property tax reform could ease supply constraints (see fiscal section above). Commercial real estate (CRE), with its rapidly growing prices, warrants close monitoring. The CRE market has been buoyant, with annual price growth exceeding 10 percent as of mid-2015. Domestic banks Page 26 have reduced their commercial real estate exposure, but international investors and nonbanks have picked up the slack. CRE is particularly sensitive to swings in sentiment about economic prospects. Since many firms rely on CRE as collateral to support their borrowing, a fall in prices could tighten corporate credit constraints, reducing business investment and economic activity. Such an event could also have negative outward spillovers via the sector’s cross-border financial linkages. Authorities’ Views The authorities will continue to monitor real estate-related financial stability risks closely, including household debt levels and also buy-to-let lending . In the second half of 2015, the government introduced a suite of measures, such as reduced interest-deductibility for buy-to-let mortgages and higher transaction taxes on buy-to-let purchases. The FPC are closely monitoring the impact of these reforms on the housing market and have indicated that they are ready to take further macroprudential action if necessary. After the mission, the government also announced a consultation on providing the BoE with powers of direction over buy-to-let lending. At the same time, the authorities emphasized that supply-side constraints were the main force behind high house prices and reiterated that much had already been done, including significant reforms to the planning system, and they remained committed to going further.