The past few quarters have seen a temporary growth setback. The U.S. is entering its seventh consecutive year of expansion. The unemployment rate has fallen to 4.7 percent, household net worth is close to pre-crisis peaks, and inflation remains contained. Nonetheless, the past few quarters have been characterized by a deceleration that is attributable to a continued contraction in energy sector investment; weak non-energy, non-residential investment; and a persistent drag from net exports (linked to weaker global growth and the strength of the U.S. dollar). Although it is more difficult to find proximate causal factors, consumer demand has also slowed. The recent disappointing growth numbers are expected to be short-lived but the latest jobs report does raise concerns that U.S. growth may be losing momentum. However, more data are needed to establish if the previously- positive trajectory for the labor market has shifted. More encouragingly, high frequency indicators point to activity already reaccelerating in the second quarter. Over the near term, we expect growth to be supported by: Labor market . Since the beginning of this year, nonfarm payroll increases have averaged 150 thousand per month and real household disposable income is growing at around 3 percent. The unemployment rate has declined to 4.7 percent, although the cyclical rebound in labor force participation earlier this year appears to have been reversed. Despite the impressive record of job creation, various indicators still point to remaining (albeit diminishing) labor market slack from those that have become detached from the labor force or are involuntarily working part-time. Housing . Most of the stock of foreclosed homes has been reabsorbed and household formation has picked up (although millennials remain constrained by affordability and high debt). Residential investment is expected to continue to rise as a share of GDP and recovering house prices should support household wealth gains. -20246-3-2-1012014Q12014Q32015Q12015Q32016Q1 Contributionto Growth (%pts) GDP growth (%, RHS) Net Exports (LHS) Government (LHS) Oil investment (LHS) Sources: BEA; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations HouseholdFormationandVacancy Rates Homeowner vacancy rate (percent, LHS) Sources: CensusBureau; and Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations Rental vacancy rate (percent, RHS) Household formation (millions, LHS) Page 11 Household balance sheets So far, lower energy prices have not provided the expected boost to private consumption that was expected (see Box 1). Nevertheless, the oil dividend and strong growth in disposable incomes have allowed households to increase saving and strengthen their balance sheets. Conditioning on the recovery in household net worth, the personal saving rate is now well above levels that would have been predicted by historical patterns. Weighing these various forces, growth is forecast to be 2.2 percent in 2016 and 2.5 percent in 2017. The output gap, which was estimated at 1 percent of potential GDP in 2015, is expected to close by end-2017 and PCE inflation is expected to slowly rise above 2 percent in 2017–19 before returning to the Federal Reserve’s medium-term target. 20152016201720182019Longer Run 2/CBO2.52.62.21.82.1Consensus 3/1.92.3n.a.n.a.n.a.IMF2.22.52.32.02.0CBO2.72.52.11.82.1Consensus 3/2.02.2n.a.n.a.n.a.FOMC2.02.12.0n.a.1.9IMF2.52.32.22.02.0CBO4.54.54.74.95.0Consensus 3/4.74.5n.a.n.a.n.a.FOMC4.74.64.6n.a.4.9IMF 4.94.84.64.75.1 CBO1.52.02.02.02.0 Consensus 3/1.62.1n.a.n.a.n.a.FOMC1.51.92.0n.a.2.0IMF 1.02.22.32.12.0CBO1.61.92.02.02.0FOMC1.71.92.0n.a.n.a.IMF 1.82.12.22.12.0CBO-2.0-0.9-0.2-0.1-0.3-0.5IMF-1.0-0.5-0.10.20.10.0 1/ CBO projections are from the Budget and Economic Outlook Jan. 2016; FOMC projections are from the June 2016 Summary of Economic Projections; IMF projections are from June 17, 2016.2/ Year 2021 other than for FOMC3/ Blue Chip Consensus, June 2016 Economic Forecasts (percent) 1/ Projections1.4 Output Gap (percent of potential, eop)Core PCE Inflation (Q4/Q4) PCE Inflation (Q4/Q4)Unemployment Rate (eop)Real GDP Growth (Q4/Q4) Real GDP Growth (annual average) & W Page 12 Box 1. Consumption and the Oil Dividend This time is different? Since November 2014, the drop in oil prices has provided a 1 percent of GDP windfall to U.S. households. Prior to the financial crisis, there was an empirically robust “excessive” reaction of consumption to energy price changes (i.e., spending increased by more than the oil price gains ). However, in the most recent episode the consumption response appears small. Post-financial crisis, the elasticity of consumption to energy price changes has fallen from around 3 to 0.4. This decline has been observed across all subcomponents of consumption but it has been particularly pronounced for goods consumption (which historically has driven the overall response but now appears insensitive to energy price changes). Why? Multiple factors are clearly at play, including the shift of the U.S. to being more energy self-sufficient in recent years. It is premature to have a conclusive view on the drivers but some stylized facts may be indicative: There no longer appears to be the same positive impact of lower oil prices on consumer confidence —a leading indicator of durable goods purchases—as in the pre-crisis era. Indeed, the near-term effects on confidence now appear, if anything, to be negative. The correlation between equity prices and oil prices has shifted from -0.3 percent pre-crisis to +0.6 percent in 2010–15. As a result, the associated wealth and confidence effects on consumption from rising equity valuations is now working in the opposite direction. The impact of oil prices on the interest rates on consumer credit are more muted than they have been in earlier historical episodes (i.e. in the 1970–80s). Indeed, it has been hard to detect any reduction in credit costs from lower oil prices since the early-1990s. See, for example, Eldstein and Kilian (2009) and Hamilton (1996). Estimates are based on a VAR framework using monthly data on real consumption from the PCE and unanticipated changes in real income from changes in gasoline prices. Consumption elasticity is defined as the percent change in consumption associated with a 1 percent increase in energy spending. gg Page 13 Lower oil prices and increasing energy independence have combined to contain the U.S. current account deficit over the past year. This has been despite the cyclical growth divergence with respect to trading partners and the rapid rise in the U.S. dollar. However, over the medium term, at current levels of the real exchange rate, the current account deficit is expected to rise above 4 percent of GDP. Net financial inflows were about 2 percent of GDP in 2015 with rising portfolio inflows being offset by weakness in direct investment and other inflows. The net international investment position (NIIP) fell to -39 percent of GDP in 2015 and, under staff’s baseline outlook, the NIIP would deteriorate by a further 10 percent of GDP over the next five years (largely due to the projected current account deficits). Risks to the growth outlook are balanced: The path of the U.S. dollar . The 13 percent real appreciation of the U.S. dollar since the summer of 2014 has taken its toll on manufacturing investment and net exports. Looking forward, the future path of the dollar represents a symmetric risk to the U.S. outlook: On the downside, further appreciation, particularly if driven by a divergence in the inflation outlook between the U.S. and other systemic economies (rather than by diverging growth prospects) would eat into growth (Box 2). The current level of the U.S. dollar is assessed to be overvalued by 10–20 percent and the current account deficit is around 1.5–2 percent of GDP larger than the level implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (see Annex IV). As such, a strengthening in the dollar would serve to push the external position further away from levels justified by medium term fundamentals. Conversely, a continuation of the depreciation that occurred since the beginning of the year would represent an important upside to both growth and inflation. Energy sector investment and output . The decline in crude prices has caused oil companies to curtail investment by about 40 percent in 2015 (subtracting 0.4 percent from GDP growth). In 2016, energy investment is expected to fall by another 30 percent, subtracting 0.2 percent from growth. The risks to growth associated with the future path of oil prices are asymmetric. Oil Investment and WTI Sources:BEA; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations Oil investment (US$ billions, LHS) WTI (US$ per barrel, RHS) EE ill EE = Page 14 On the downside, the compression of capital spending that has already occurred implies that even at lower oil prices, larger-than-expected falls in investment will be small as a share of GDP and have only a minor impact on growth. However, if oil prices sustain their current levels and tight financing conditions for the sector begin to normalize, oil-related investment could resume, with a modest upside risk to activity (Box 3). Non-oil investment. A shrinking output gap and decent prospects for future domestic demand growth should support investment in non-oil, non-residential sectors. However, recent data has shown such investment moving in the opposite direction. This could be reflective of the strength of the U.S. dollar or perhaps broader industrial spillovers from the downturn in the energy sector. It could also reflect a more structural trend at work as U.S. output becomes less intensive in physical capital and more reliant on human and informational capital. If true, this would pose a downside risk to aggregate demand as the economy adjusts to the new equilibrium. Finally, a consumption effect? To date, there has been little apparent consumption stimulus from lower oil prices (the personal savings ratio stands at 5.4 percent, up ½ percent since mid-2014). Nonetheless, lower oil prices are helping to strengthen household balance sheets, particularly for lower income households. This should, at a minimum, increase the resilience of the economy to negative shocks and could mean a belated reaction of consumption. As such, this offers an unambiguous upside to the growth forecast. U.K. exit from European Union . Staff estimates suggest the impact on U.S. growth of a disruptive U.K. exit from the European Union are likely to be modest. The principal channels would come through a sustained rise in global risk aversion that would lead to a compression of U.S. sovereign yields, a rise in the U.S. dollar and a sell-off in risk assets. However, given the unprecedented nature of the event, the broader effects-including on the U.S. economy and its large financial system-are highly uncertain and could evolve in unpredictable and more negative ways than indicated by macro models. A misjudgment about potential growth. There is a risk that staff’s outlook has over-estimated both the historical path of potential growth and the degree of slack that currently exists. If true, this could mean that the economy is now starting to bump up against capacity constraints (including in the labor market). As such, growth for the coming years could settle at well below 2 percent. Perhaps more problematic, a lower path of potential could give rise to an unexpected acceleration in inflationary pressures in the near-term, leading the Federal Growth: Potential and Actual (percent) Sources: BEA;and IMF staff estimates Actual Potential Projection Page 15 Reserve to more assertively raise the policy rate. This would cause the dollar to appreciate and increase asset price volatility (as market participants find themselves wrong-footed). Spillover implications . Such a scenario would have important negative spillovers, particularly given that the global economy currently appears ill-prepared for a rapid rise in U.S. policy rates, for capital to flow back to the U.S., for risk premia to rise, and for the dollar to accelerate upwards. Such near-term negative spillovers would be further exacerbated by the real transmission effects of a path for medium-term U.S. growth that is well below current expectations. Risks are skewed toward lower inflation. Further dollar strength would present a drag to imported inflation. However, even in the event of a stable currency, the significant global excess capacity seen across a range of tradable goods may lead to a protracted decline in tradable goods prices. This would be further exacerbated if the recent pattern of downgrades to global growth prospects continues. Finally, changing dynamics in the U.S. labor market, that are at this point not fully understood, may mean that the expected pick up in nominal wages could prove elusive, further weighing on inflation. Authorities’ views . Tepid growth over the last few quarters was viewed as likely to be transitory, especially when contrasted with the strong labor market data through April. Given the maturation of the cycle, the pace of job gains is expected to slow but, in May, job growth slowed substantially more than expected and that abruptness seems inconsistent with other more positive activity indicators. In the coming quarters, it was expected that sequential growth rates would pick up and moderately exceed potential growth. Near-term risks to the growth outlook were considered to be broadly balanced but there was some modest downside potential to inflation outcomes, particularly given weak global trends and the impact of residual seasonality on data in the first half of the year. Concern was expressed about the continued widening of the U.S. current account deficit, particularly as a symptom of weak global demand. Counterparts emphasized the importance that countries, including the U.S., use all available policy tools to boost demand. Officials also highlighted a number of advanced and emerging market economies with large external surpluses (including China, Germany, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan Province of China) which could usefully bolster domestic demand and, in so doing, contribute to stronger global growth and a more balanced world economy. Page 16 Box 2. Drivers of the U.S. Dollar Drivers. Uncovered interest parity seems to be rejected by the data (see Engle 2013 for a review) but a more expansive theory would argue that exchange rate movements could be related to: Expected cumulative short-term rate differentials (as measured by movements in long-term rate differentials that capture divergences in medium-term neutral rates as well as inflation and monetary policy prospects); Foreign exchange risk premia (extracted from survey expectations of exchange rates from Consensus Forecasts); and Movements in the equilibrium real exchange rate (e.g. due to changes in the terms of trade). Empirical findings. A VAR framework that adds variables to proxy global and country-specific shocks (VIX, WTI, expected inflation differentials, expected growth differentials, and short-term interest rates), reveals: FX risk premia and the 10-year interest rate differentials have a significant and persistent effect on exchange rates. A global uncertainty shock (proxied by a higher VIX) induces an appreciation of safe haven currencies and the U.S. dollar rises against all other major bilaterals except the Yen. Commodity currencies, such as the Canadian dollar, are sensitive to oil price movements including through a knock-on effect on the foreign currency risk premium. See Balakrishnan, Laseen, and Pescatori, “U.S. Dollar Dynamics: How Important are Policy Divergence and FX Risk Premiums?” IMF Working Paper (2016). nu Months Trade-Weighted Dollar Response to Risk Premium and Interest Differential Shocks (percent) 1/ Source: IMF staff estimates 1/ Trade-weighted by Euro, Canadian dollar, UK pound, and yen; 68% bands Risk premium (>0 =preference for US assets, LHS) 10 year interest differential (foreignminus US, RHS) Dollar appreciation > = Months Dollar IRFs to VIX Shock (percent) Source: IMF staff estimates UK PoundCanadian Dollar European Euro Japanese YenDollar appreciation Page 17 Box 3. U.S. Shale Oil and Global Spillovers The shale oil “revolution”. The U.S. oil industry experienced one of its most dramatic shifts in 2010–15 when the combination of high prices and technological change (notably horizontal drilling) allowed a doubling of U.S. crude production. Both the number and productivity of rigs increased with important implications for the oil market and global economy more broadly. Scenarios. Forecasts of future production face tremendous uncertainty but scenarios can help identify the range of possible future outcomes. Specifically, we examine three scenarios: Baseline. Draws on the prediction of the future rig count that would be consistent with the current medium-term WTI forecast in the WEO; assumes a linear improvement in productivity; Upside. Assumes a similar rig count to the baseline but with a quadratic upward trend for productivity per rig; Downside. Assumes decreasing gains in productivity (i.e. uses a concave trend) and lowers the estimated impact of WTI price on the rig count by one standard deviation. The differential impact on production from these modest changes in assumptions is large. By 2020, U.S. production could range from 3.5 to 8.4 million barrels per day depending on the scenario (the baseline scenario is very similar to the EIA’s latest forecast). Global Spillovers. Using the G20 model, these shale oil scenarios are found to have: Relatively symmetric effects in the upside and downside scenarios, with the decline in global oil prices in the upside scenario leading to an increase of global GDP of about 0.4 percent. The biggest winners in an upside production scenario are India and Korea which have large oil imports. The most negative effects are for Saudi Arabia and Russia, as they are highly dependent on oil and have limited trade links with the US. Despite the significant oil price decline in the upside scenario, Canada and Mexico (which are oil exporters) receive a marginally positive short-term impact on GDP because of their strong trade links with the U.S. However, these effects turn moderately negative by 2021. Upside Scenario Real GDP, 2021 (% diff.) United States Saudi Arabia World Source: G20 z J K hun illi Page 18 Near-term fiscal policy has been well-calibrated to the prevailing economic circumstances. At the general government level, the change in the structural primary balance is expected to be -½ and 0.1 percent of GDP in 2016 and 2017, respectively. This should be mildly supportive of growth, particularly if gauged against the fiscal contractions (of around ½ percent of GDP) experienced in 2014–15. From a macroeconomic perspective, both near-term fiscal and monetary policies appear consistent with the need to provide modest support to the economy as it transitions toward full employment in the face of global and domestic headwinds (near-term fiscal and monetary policy settings are in line with recommendations in the 2015 Article IV, see Annex I). Fiscal uncertainties have been diminished by the passage of The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 which suspended the debt ceiling until March 2017 and avoided the risk of government shutdown by locking in appropriations for 2016 and 2017. Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act that lowered tax revenues by 3½ percent of GDP over the next 10 years. Among the many provisions, the bill made permanent the enhanced child tax credit, the American Opportunity tax credit for college tuition, and the improvements to the earned income tax credit (i.e. the expansion to larger families and removal of the marriage penalty). The bill also made permanent the research and experimentation credit for corporations (which had been temporarily extended 15 times since 1985, sometimes retroactively). Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act that commits US$305 billion to surface transportation for the next 4 years and provides some degree of stability to states in planning projects that are co-financed with federal resources. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) was the most comprehensive health reform since the introduction of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965 Data is now beginning to emerge as to its effects. Health insurance coverage has risen significantly, with the uninsured falling to 9.1 percent of the population in 2015. However, this still means 28.8 million people remain without insurance. The remaining uninsured are mainly low-income young adults and non-permanent immigrants, including those with incomes that are too high to qualify for Medicaid (in those 19 states that chose not to expand Medicaid to households that earn less than 133 percent of the federal poverty threshold) but too low to receive ACA insurance premium subsidies. Following passage of the ACA, health costs have been rising at a slower pace (PCE health care inflation has risen, on average, by 1.4 percent per year over the past 5 years). The impact of the ACA on labor supply remains unclear and subject to large uncertainties. The Congressional Budget Office estimates the ACA would reduce hours worked by around 1.7 percent by 2025 (although other empirical studies have smaller effects). Also, the ACA requirement to maintain children on a parent’s insurance until they are 26 years old appears to have raised the wages of young adults. Finally, the early evidence suggests that the ACA has provided Page 19 some support to those below, or close to, the poverty line (simulation analysis points to a 6 percent increase in the income equivalent for the lowest quintile). The volatility in financial markets in the early part of 2016 does not detract from the fact that financial conditions have been very supportive of the real economy (Figure 1). This is particularly true after parsing out the effects—on equity and bond prices—of the evident stress in energy and mining companies. Most notably, the availability and cost of financing for households— mortgage rates, auto loans, and the senior loan officer survey—remain very favorable. Also, as risk- free rates have trended downwards, investment grade yields of non-energy companies have generally been moving sideways. Risks to the U.S. financial system are broadly unchanged from that of a year ago The U.S. banking system continues to strengthen its capital position. Tier 1 capital is at 13 percent of risk weighted assets (RWA), with increasing RWA density (now at 71 percent). The system appears resilient to a range of extreme market and economic shocks. The results of the 2016 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review exercise will, however, be released in June, precluding an updated assessment relative to the 2015 Article IV. Measures to bolster bank liquidity, as well as strengthen recovery and resolution, are being steadily implemented. There are some pockets of vulnerability . These include credit quality in auto lending, student loans, and commercial real estate lending. Energy and mining loan exposures are also likely to bear losses. However, these are relatively small parts of the U.S. financial system. Compressed interest margins continue to weigh on bank profitability and are causing intermediation to increasingly move to the nonbank sector, including mortgage origination and servicing being relocated to specialist non-banks. However, such mortgages are predominantly being securitized by the government sponsored enterprises and meet the debt-to-income and underwriting requirements of the Qualified Mortgage standard. Housing market policies, including expanded lending by the Federal Housing Administration, are, however, leading to looser underwriting standards which could, over time, worsen the credit quality of mortgages. The various financial stability issues highlighted in the 2015 FSAP, for the most part, have not been addressed (Annex II). These include data blind spots, the lack of risk management requirements and stress testing for the asset management industry, residual vulnerabilities in repo markets and money market funds, the complex institutional structure for financial regulation, a housing finance system that remains in limbo, and an incomplete understanding by the regulators of financial interlinkages. lli Page 20 Figure 1. Financial Conditions Lending standards are still supportive of growth, especially for households. The energy sector has led a price correction in equity indices. However, energy and mining corporate profits are a small fraction of the total. Low interest rates have led to sustained credit growth. Rising high yield spreads reflect default concerns that are broader than just energy. Despite higher spreads, yields have mostly moved sideways as risk-free rates have trended down. Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations mm & ll Equity Market (2010Q1=100, log) S&P 500S&P 500; energyS&P 500; financials Corporate Spreads (percent) Investment gradeex-energyHigh yield ex-energyHigh yieldInvestment grade Corporate Profitsby Sector (US$trillions) Other domestic industriesPetroleum and coalFinancial Corporate Yields (percent) AAA YieldBAA Yield Page 21 A large U.S. insurance company appealed its designation by the Financial Stability Oversight Council as a Systemically Important Financial Institution. Subsequently, a federal court has ruled on the case and decided to rescind the designation. The Financial Stability Oversight Council is currently appealing that court decision. The potential lack of market liquidity in a range of fixed income instruments, particularly at times when markets are under stress, remains a concern that could increase the risk of destabilizing forced asset sales or create volatility in market pricing. In the new regulatory environment, banks’ balance sheet space for market-making activities has become tighter and alternative market systems are still unable to provide a full offset. Such market illiquidity not only induces more price volatility but also has the potential for creating macro-financial effects. However, adaptation is already occurring on multiple fronts as buy-side institutions arrange their activities with an understanding that liquidity-under-stress will be lower.