Since the first rate increase in December, the predicted pace of subsequent rate increases has slowed (in both the FOMC and market’s expectations) . Despite a string of strong labor market data, there has been concern around weak activity and, more recently, jobs data, recurrent bouts of financial market volatility, and diminishing global prospects. The FOMC has emphasized the shallow, gradual upward slope in its expected policy rate profile and has underlined that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in the longer run. Wage and price inflation appears contained . Price developments have been marginally above staff’s expectations at the time of the last Article IV. However, wage indicators appear moderately softer than had been previously envisaged, despite the labor market repairing on a faster-than-expected timetable. Over the past 12 months, compensation growth as measured by the employment cost index has fallen to under 2 percent and average hourly earnings are only modestly higher (at 2.5 percent). Despite this, inflation outcomes are currently expected to follow a slow trajectory back to the central bank’s medium term target as labor market slack is steadily exhausted. V W mm oo un Page 36 Figure 2. Inflation Dynamics Core PCE goods prices, housing, and health care services are the key drivers in PCE inflation. Core inflation has been held down by low import prices. Health care wage growth has stabilized which likely presages increasing health care inflation. Leading to a slow upward path for core PCE in the past several months. Pointing to an important role for the dollar in inflation dynamics. Shelter costs are expected to continue rising with the ongoing recovery in the housing market. Sources: BEA; and IMF staff calculations ll oo ll EE Health Inflation (percent, yoy) Employment Cost Index, health sectorHealth care services prices Shelter Inflation (percent, yoy) PCE housing prices (LHS) Home price index (3Q lag, RHS) Page 37 Evidently, monetary policy should remain data dependent . It is also important to note that it will be the whole expected future path of rate movements that will be relevant for the macroeconomy. At this point in the cycle, there is a clear case to proceed along a very gradual upward path for the fed funds rate, conscious of global disinflationary trends and confirming along the way that wage and price inflation are indeed maintaining their steady upward momentum. Evidence suggests that the trade-off between slack and price pressures appears to have remained reasonably stable (Box 7). Staff’s own macroeconomic outlook is built on an assumption of two further rate increases in the second half of 2016 and the forecasted outturns for growth, inflation, and unemployment are broadly in line with the FOMC’s own summary of economic projections. Given the likelihood and severity of downside risks to inflation, the potential for a drift down in inflation expectations, the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, and the asymmetries posed by the effective lower bound, the path for policy rates should accept some modest, temporary overshooting of the Federal Reserve’s inflation goal to allow inflation to approach the Fed’s 2 percent medium-term target from above. Doing so will provide valuable insurance against the risks of disinflation, policy reversal, and ending back at a zero fed funds rate (see Working Paper). The Federal Reserve should be clear in communicating its intentions and emphasize that its medium-term inflation goal is symmetric and that inflation could well approach their target from above. If either wage or price inflation becomes visible at a faster pace than is embedded in staff’s current forecasts, interest rates should be raised on a more front-loaded timetable. Authorities’ views . A healthy labor market—notwisthstanding the slowdown in job growth in May—and real income growth were expected to support a pickup in consumer spending, leading to a faster pace of GDP growth in the coming quarters. The low unemployment rate appears, at present, to be exerting little upward pressure on wage or price inflation. However, with consumer demand growth continuing, the dollar no longer appreciating and energy prices apparently having bottomed out, there was confidence that inflation would move steadily upward to the 2 percent objective in the medium run. If incoming data shows economic growth continuing to pick up, labor market conditions continuing to strengthen, and inflation making progress toward 2 percent, then it likely would be appropriate to gradually increase the federal funds rate in the coming months. However, incoming data would determine the timing and pace of future rate adjustments. There is no preset course for the policy rate. Officials indicated that the Federal Reserve’s medium term inflation goal should not be viewed as a ceiling and there were likely to be symmetric errors around the 2 percent target. However, there was no intention to engineer an overshoot the inflation objective and the welfare case for doing so was not compelling. There was a concern also that aiming to overshoot the medium-term target would create the risk of being behind the curve and potentially being faced with a need to raise rates more quickly especially if the labor market tightening led to a faster increase in inflation than seen until now. This could be disruptive and undermine the achievement of the Federal Reserve’s mandates of maximum employment and stable prices. Page 38 Box 7. Did the Global Financial Crisis Break the U.S. Phillips Curve? A structural break? Since the global crisis, the combination of high unemployment and a lack of wage deflation, followed by a period where unemployment was declining steadily without an acceleration in wage growth, has raised questions as to whether the nature of the unemployment-inflation trade-off has changed. Particularly, has the Phillips curve flattened or shifted to become less responsive to “slack”? A multivariate approach. Using a large-cross-section Bayesian Vector Auto Regression and dynamic factor model that exploits a wide range of data in a flexible framework, we find that there is some evidence, post- recession, that the nature of underlying shocks to the economy has changed. However, there is little evidence of a change in the coefficients of the Phillips curve. In addition, corporate bond spreads are found to be an important predictor of unemployment and financial and external variables are predictive of inflation. Markov-switching. A separate approach was deployed using a flexible, New Keynesian model that allows for 3-state regime switching both in the structure of shocks and in the model coefficients. The model that best fits the data is one that shows no change in the Phillips curve itself but a change in the coefficients in the monetary policy reaction function. This change in the reaction function induces a shift in the time series variance-covariance structure between inflation and unemployment. The Phillips curve has, according to these results, not broken. Rather, describing recent dynamics needs a structural model that allows for a shift in the monetary policy reaction function in order to best explain the post-financial crisis changes in the structure of correlations seen in the data. Estimating a single equation Phillips curve, without allowing for such changes in the policy reaction function, would make it erroneously appear as if the Phillips curve itself has tilted downwards. See Laseen, S. and Taheri Sanjani, M., “Did the Global Financial Crisis Break the U.S. Phillips Curve?”, IMF Working Paper (2016) See Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2010) “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations”, NBER Working Paper 17021. illi mm ’ illi illi Page 39