Important progress has been made to strengthen banks’ balance sheets and ability to lend Following the Bank of England’s 2013 capital-building exercise, major UK banks’ common equity tier 1 ratios (on a fully-loaded Basel-III basis) have risen above 9 percent, while provisioning for future loan losses and conduct-related costs has strengthened. Encouragingly, the capital build was largely driven by new capital issuance and non-core deleveraging. Liquidity indicators have also improved, with a further reduction in wholesale funding. Overall, faster balance sheet repair has been associated with a fall in banks’ borrowing costs to historic lows, and rising equity valuations. In turn, credit conditions have eased and loan growth is resuming. PPIIRSLIBORTotal Major Banks' Provisions for Conduct-Related Costs (Billions Pounds) Source: Annual statements for RBS, HSBS, Barclays and LBG. Svenska SwedbankSkandinaviskaNordeaDNB KBC UBSDanskeIntesaABN Amro HSBC BPCELBGBNP PariabasCredit Suisse ING DeutscheUnicreditBarclaysCommerzbank RBS End-2013 Basel-III Common Equity Tier 1 Ratios Reported by Selected European Banks (Percent; fully-loaded) Green bars represent end-2012 positions; beige bars show y-o-y increase to end-2013. Source:SNL Financial. Ratios reported by banks may not be strictly comparable given differences in banks' definitions and assumptions about Basel III end-point rules. 20122013Change Capital adequacy Total capital ratio16.218.82.5Tier 1 ratio13.214.51.3Tangible common equity ratio4.14.50.3Leverage ratio4.64.80.2 Asset quality Provision for loan loss / total loans0.90.90.0Reserves for loan loss (% of non-performing assets)39.449.39.9Non-performing assets / total loans6.85.6-1.2Loan growth (including to banks)-2.1-2.7-0.6 Profitability Net interest income / avg. earning assets1.401.39-0.01Efficiency ratio (overheads/revenue)60.665.04.4Return on assets-0.02-0.06-0.04Return on common equity-1.2-1.6-0.4Trading income (% of total revenue)8.415.06.5 Liquidity Total loans to total deposits104.298.1-6.1Wholesale funding / total liabilities59.353.5-5.9ST borrowings / total liabilities5.95.4-0.5Liquid assets / total assets16.316.40.11/ Simple average for Barclays, HSBC, LBG and RBS. Financial Soundness Indicators for Major UK Banks 1/ (Percent)Source: Bloomberg, based on data published by individual banks. Indicators reported on a Basel-II basis. Page 18 But further capital effort will likely be needed over the medium-term, and in the face of structural headwinds to profitability. Some major UK banks’ capital positions still fall short of most European peers’. Banks are factoring into their capital plans expectations of higher capital in the future, and these plans should receive helpful support from the recovery in the UK economy and global demand for financial services. However, building internal equity will remain challenging due to a longer- and larger-than-expected drag from conduct-related costs; a weak outlook for investment banking returns; and the associated need—in some cases—to undertake and/or complete costly business restructuring. There are also new risks looming on the horizon. Banks’ exposures to the housing market have increased over the last two years, with the share of residential mortgages in earning assets among the five major lenders rising by an average of almost 4 percentage points. Other new risks include the exposure of the two international banks, HSBC and Standard Chartered, to a China slowdown; and indirect financial spillovers from a potential geopolitical crisis involving Russia (banks’ direct exposures are small). Overlaying these is the concern that a disorderly correction in markets’ pricing of risk could entail losses for many globally-connected UK-resident banks and dealers. Source: Bloomberg. US Implied Volatility (VIX Index) GBP Short-Rate Option-Implied Volatility FTSE 100 Option-Implied Volatility (right scale) Source: Bloomberg.1/ Short-rate volatilities represent the 3-month option- implied volatilities of 1-year swaps. UK Implied Volatilities Canada United States GermanyFranceJapanAustraliaNetherlands Switzerland United Kingdom HK+SG China India+MIT Source: BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics (Ultimate Risk Basis). HK denotes China: Hong Kong SAR, and MIT denote Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand. Banks' Consolidated Foreign Claims on Selected Asian Economies (Percent of GDP; end-Sep-2013) Page 19 The two government-intervened banks face divergent challenges. Returning RBS to profitability has proven difficult, due partly to its complex business model, but also to its outsized operating costs. The new strategy—featuring an internal bad bank and refocusing a more efficient core bank on UK retail and corporate activity—seems appropriate, but execution risks remain. By contrast, LBG’s strong performance has enabled the government to sell one third of its shareholding (which is now below 25 percent) over the past year, but the bank’s large and rising exposure to the UK housing market remains a source of risk. The authorities are seeking to institute a robust regulatory capital framework for banks based on risk-weighted capital, the leverage ratio and stress testing. This multi- pronged approach is an appropriate response to dangers revealed by the crisis of relying on a single measure of capital adequacy. Given the size and systemic nature of the UK financial system, there is a strong case to fully utilize the flexibility afforded under the Capital Requirements Regulation and Capital Requirements Directive (CRDIV) in relation to Pillar-II and countercyclical buffers; and to introduce a leverage ratio requirement above Basel minima. However, the authorities will need to communicate clearly and early their regulatory expectations under this more complex regime to alleviate uncertainty for complying institutions. The 2014 concurrent stress tests, coordinated with the European Banking Authority (EBA), will offer a timely assessment of the ability of the eight major UK banks to withstand large shocks. The EBA’s common adverse scenario and the Bank’s UK-specific scenario helpfully complement each other. The success of the stress tests will rest on maintaining the improved coordination between macro- and micro-prudential authorities; clear communication about capital definitions, hurdle rates and any required capital actions by banks (including on capital planning frameworks); and sufficiently-disaggregated disclosure of results. It would also be important for any required capital actions (especially those for the two international banks) to be fully informed by the The former features a rise in bond yields and reversal in risk assessment, especially toward emerging markets; the latter combines a negative productivity surprise, a snapback in the policy rate, and a 35 percent fall in house prices. In percent 20112013Increase (ppt)Barclays plc12.014.42.5HSBC Bank plc10.411.61.2LBG Group plc39.444.65.2Nationwide BS68.875.06.2RBS10.214.13.9Average28.232.03.8Sources: Fitch; RBS Annual Reports; and IMF staff estimates. Residential mortgage loans-to-total earning assets ratio for major UK lenders Tier 1 Leverage Ratios for Selected Systemically-Important Banks (Percent; end-March-2014) Sources: Citi Research, 19 June 2014; Company accounts; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Includes impact of Deutsche's capital raise and Credit Suisse's US conduct settlement in May-June 2014. 2/ Supplemental leverage ratios for US banks; CRDIV definition for EU banks (except Swiss banks, for which FINMA definition). 3/ For LBG and HSBC, data is end-2013. Page 20 results of sequential stress tests conducted by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) to assess banks’ resilience to a sharp China slowdown. To more comprehensively identify risks in the system, broadening the institutional perimeter of the stress tests and strengthening supervision beyond the major banks would be important. The authorities have laid out medium-term plans that could see the concurrent stress testing framework extended to systemic entities beyond major UK banks. In addition, there are broader efforts aimed at strengthening the monitoring of risks in the shadow banking system. These efforts are critical given the size of shadow banking activity routed through the UK, recent evidence of search-for-yield and leverage build-up outside the banking system, and the associated risk of outward financial spillovers in the event of an abrupt change in risk sentiment. Any additional budgetary resources, regulatory perimeter adjustments, and international coordination initiatives (in relation to “global” shadow banking), required to support these efforts should be prioritized.