The banking sector is well capitalized and liquid, and could withstand severe shocks. The authorities noted that lower oil prices have not had a significant impact on banks so far, although it was acknowledged that deposit and credit growth has slowed down. However, lower oil prices and a higher dollar or real interest rates could have negative effects on nonhydrocarbon growth and real estate prices, which could in turn affect the asset quality of banks. Staff estimates of a vector autoregression model with oil price changes, nonhydrocarbon GDP growth, and NPL changes indicate that the effect of lower oil prices on NPLs has been small, in line with the estimated effects of expansionary fiscal policy (Annex IV). A severe stress test, with a sharp contraction in nonhydrocarbon GDP and real estate prices, was conducted by the CBU (Box 3). It shows that the banking sector would generally remain well capitalized and only four out of 22 banks would have lower than the 12 percent minimum regulatory requirement. Measures have already been taken to increase capital for two of these banks. Similar actions need to be taken for the remaining institutions. Regarding liquidity, stress tests showed that four banks would be below the minimum 100 percent Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). Therefore, the central bank should encourage these banks to change their liquidity profile in order to comply with the minimum 100 percent LCR. The CBU has engaged in an ambitious reform program to strengthen its banking regulatory and supervisory framework. The CBU is reviewing banking regulation and supervision with the aim to modernize its framework in line with international best practice. In this context, the CBU is advised to timely implement its plans to phase in Basel III capital and liquidity standards over 2015-19. In this regard, the CBU has recently issued new regulation to strengthen liquidity requirements to move towards the Basel III liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). The authorities noted that most banks would comply with a simple liquid asset ratio and Basel III capital standards. Considering the high concentration in the banking sector, this framework should also include capital surcharges for domestically systemically important banks (D-SIBs). Moreover, the CBU should continue to strengthen its risk-based supervision, initially focusing on systemically important banks. In addition, compliance by banks with the loan concentration limits for GREs and local governments should be monitored, including the planned transition paths for banks exceeding the limits, and no exemption should be granted to ensure a level playing field and regulatory discipline across banks. The authorities stressed that they have a no-exemption policy, holding banks accountable for all regulations. Page 20 Credit Risk Stress Testing Box 3. Stress Testing UAE Banks The CBU conducted a top-down solvency stress test to assess the resilience of the banking system to deterioration in credit quality. It estimated expected losses (ELs) arising from a three-year downturn scenario. Key assumptions include exposure-at-default (loans and advances) as of end-2014, 60 percent loss-given- default (LGD), and probabilities of default (PD) proxied by nonperforming loans net of write-offs. Banks are assumed to continue lending with credit growing at 2 percent. Net income before provisions evolves in line with non-oil GDP, and ELs directly affect the capital adequacy ratio (CAR). PDs are a function of non-oil GDP and real estate prices. The downturn scenario consists of a 7 percent decline in non-oil GDP in 2015, 1.5 percent decline in 2016, and no growth in 2017 while real estate prices fall by 35 percent in 2015, 6 percent in 2016, and 5 percent in 2017, both implying a total increase in PDs by six times at end-2017. Only a few medium and small banks would be adversely affected as a result of the initial high CARs and low NPL ratios in the banking system. The stress test reveals that the average CAR would decline from 18.1 percent to 14.8 percent under the downturn scenario. However, the capital of four banks would be below the 12 percent minimum CAR, with a capital shortfall of AED 5.3 billion. This limited impact resulted from low NPL ratios and high CARs in the banking system at end-2014. One medium bank has already obtained approval to raise its capital by AED 4.9 billion, and a request is under consideration to increase the capital of a second bank by AED 3 billion. The CARs could still be adversely affected by risks arising from single-name concentrations and second-round effects between bank asset quality and macroeconomic conditions. Also, a higher LGD than observed during major debt GRE and corporate restructurings following the 2008–09 crisis could also lead to larger capital shortfalls. Liquidity Risk Stress Testing The CBU also conducted liquidity stress test based on the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) methodology. LCR aims to ensure that banks hold enough high-quality liquid assets that can be converted into cash to meet obligations for a 30 day-period under a stress scenario. Overall, haircuts on assets reflect their liquidity while the run-off rates on deposits and other liabilities are assumptions on their likely withdrawal. The LCR stress test included a baseline and an adverse scenario with additional 5-10 percent haircut on high-quality liquid assets on average and an additional 5 percent run-off rate on stable deposits on top of the LCR assumptions. Most banks pass the minimum 100 percent LCR even under the adverse scenario. The overall LCR would decline from 170 percent under the LCR baseline to 157 percent under the adverse LCR scenario. However, four banks (2 small and 2 mid-size banks) would be below the minimum 100 percent LCR under both the baseline and adverse LCR scenarios. The liquidity gap would be about AED 3.2 billion. The four banks would need to change their liquidity profile to comply with the minimum 100 percent LCR. The phase-in introduction of the LCR with a 60 percent requirement in 2015 provides banks with a schedule to adjust to the 100 percent requirement by 2019. Local banksLess than AED 30 billion Betweeen AED 30 and 120 billionLarger than AED 120 billion CAR (in percent)18.120.717.518.2Number of banks 21975Aggregate capital (In AED billion)277.033.072.0172.0CAR (in percent)14.816.013.815.1Number of banks below minimum 12 percent CAR4220Aggregate capital shortfall to reach 12% CAR (in AED billion)5.31.93.40.0Source: CBUAE1/ Three-year adverse scenario. 2017 1/2014 Credit Risk Stress Testing Local banksLess than AED 30 billion Betweeen AED 30 and 120 billionLarger than AED 120 billion Number of banks22985LCR (in percent)169.9262.4182.7158.0 Number of banks with LCR<1 4220Liquidity shortfall (In AED billion)2.20.81.50.0Liquidity shortfall (In percentage of total assets)0.10.40.30.0LCR (in percent)157.1245.4166.5146.6Number of banks with LCR<14220Liquidity shortfall (In AED billion)3.20.82.40.0Liquidity shortfall (In percentage of total assets)0.20.50.50.0Source: CBUAE Liquidity Risk Stress Testing Stressed LCR LCR Page 21 In the medium term under an improved supervisory framework, safety nets and resolution frameworks should be strengthened. The bank resolution framework should be developed, in line with the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions, such as strengthening the resolution powers of the central bank by designating it as the lead resolution authority for banks and their subsidiaries, and equipping it with robust tools. As part of the resolution framework, a deposit insurance scheme should be put in place. The authorities informed staff that they are studying other countries’ experience. Increased importance of Islamic finance calls for addressing specific financial stability aspects. Rapid growth of Islamic banking over the past decade has led to an increase of its share in total assets to 17 percent and in deposits to 19 percent (Annex V). Therefore, it is important to tailor the regulatory and supervisory frameworks to adequately address Islamic banks’ specific risks, including profit-sharing investment accounts and Shari'ah governance, as well as to continue developing Shari'ah-compliant liquidity management instruments that would enable Islamic banks to conduct robust liquidity management. Authorities stressed that the regulatory and supervisory frameworks do not differentiate between Islamic and conventional banks, but work is ongoing to review these frameworks and address Islamic banks’ specificities. The introduction of macroprudential measures helped address real estate market risks, but the establishment of a full-fledged policy framework is warranted. The maximum loan-to- value ratios (LTV) for mortgages and debt-service-to-income limits (DSTI) have helped limit the systemic risk arising from real estate price speculation, and should remain in place as the market is stabilizing and does not threaten financial stability. The central bank plans to introduce capital and liquidity macroprudential tools and to publish a financial stability report on a regular basis. However, currently there is no formalized macroprudential policy framework. Authorities and staff agreed that a macroprudential framework should be developed in line with best practices In particular, an improved system would involve a review of the central bank law to formalize a financial stability mandate and cement the use of a broad range of macroprudential instruments (including the Basel III counter-cyclical buffer); the establishment of a Financial Stability Committee at the central bank level; and the institutionalization of the coordination with the Ministry of Finance and other relevant agencies. GREs should continue to be strengthened to reduce macro-financial vulnerabilities. As some GREs are highly indebted, it will be important to continue managing upcoming debt repayments proactively, including using timely communication to guide market expectations. The authorities noted that the GREs have been proactive in managing debt repayments. Improvements in GRE risk management, reporting, and governance will be important to facilitate their further strengthening. A transfer of maturing debt by GREs to domestic banks should be avoided to preserve banking sector stability, while raising risk-weights to GRE lending could make such transfer costly to banks. The authorities indicated that those GREs that are listed disclose their financials in the annual reports. Staff recommended that the Dubai government collect and publish information on Dubai GRE debt. Page 22 Developing domestic debt markets would reduce the reliance of the government, GREs, and private companies on external funding and bank lending. It would also provide adequate instruments for banks’ liquidity management under the recently issued Basel III liquidity rules. Authorities are encouraged to pass the draft Public Debt Law, which would allow the central government to issue debt and provide a yield curve that could be used as a benchmark by the private sector. Stepping up securities issuance by Emirates’ governments would also help deepen the domestic market. Moving ahead with the adoption of a trust law would facilitate Sukuk issuance. The authorities indicated that they plan to push ahead with developing the domestic debt market and to establish a benchmark yield curve. Progress in strengthening the effectiveness of the anti money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) regime should be pursued. The recent revision of the AML/CFT Law and the approval of the executive by-laws are welcome. The authorities should bring forward their plan to conduct a national risk assessment, and continue strengthening the risk based supervision of financial and nonfinancial businesses and professions to ensure that they adequately apply preventive measures commensurate with their risks including identification of beneficial owners and reporting of suspicious transactions. To complement these measures, the authorities should also seek a better understanding of the origins and intended use of financial flows. These efforts combined with an enhanced dialogue with foreign regulators and other stakeholders should contribute to preventing de-risking by correspondent banks that could potentially divert remittances to informal channels and impact adversely financial inclusion.