Economic activity is expected to further moderate in 2016, before improving over the medium term. Nonhydrocarbon growth is projected to further slow to 2.4 percent in 2016 due to fiscal consolidation, a stronger dollar, and tighter monetary and financial conditions with credit growth falling to 5 percent. Over the medium term, nonhydrocarbon growth is forecast to recover to above 4 percent as the dampening effect of fiscal consolidation is offset by: (i) the expected improvement in oil prices and its positive effects on confidence and financial conditions; (ii) the pickup in private investment in the run-up to the Expo 2020 supported by robust private sector credit growth; and (iii) increased demand from Iran after the easing of sanctions. Growth in hydrocarbon production will likely be limited, given the global supply glut. Inflation is projected to decline to 3.3 percent in 2016. The fiscal deficit is expected to widen and the current account surplus to decline in 2016, owing to lower oil prices, before improving over the medium term. Credit to non-oil GDP gap is forecast to remain negative over the medium- term, and credit to non-oil GDP to remain stable at 143.5 percent (Tables 2-5). The easing of Iran sanctions was estimated to add 1 percentage point to real GDP growth over 2016-18 (See Box 2, 2015 Article IV staff report). However, the significant positive impact might be delayed beyond 2016, as financial institutions’ reengagement with Iran remains slow and so far trade does not appear to have picked up appreciably. ab & LLLL LL MMMMM LLLL LLLLLLL pp nnu nnu undn LLLLLLL MMMMM LLLLLLL MMMMM an X ab ab X an an LLLLLLLLLLLL ag LLLLLLLLLLLLL LL LLLL LLL LLLLLLLLLLL nnu Page 14 Risks are tilted to the downside. (See Risk Assessment Matrix).  External risks . The main external risk is a further sustained drop in oil prices, with export and fiscal revenue losses remaining the most significant transmission channels. The effects would be exacerbated by falling liquidity in the banking system from further draw-downs of government deposits, and rising NPLs due to weaker activity on account of fiscal retrenchment. Weaker asset quality could also have negative effects on credit and non-oil GDP growth. Moreover, lower oil prices would continue to exacerbate volatility in the stock markets and have a negative effect on real estate prices. Higher U.S. interest rates and volatile global financial conditions could also trigger rollover risks for banks and GREs, intensify liquidity strains and further weaken business and consumer confidence, and additional appreciation of the dollar would weigh on competitiveness and external demand. Slowdowns in other GCC countries could spill over through trade, tourism and asset prices, while increased issuance to finance deficits in these countries could put pressures on liquidity and cost of funding. Also, as an important partner in terms of inward FDI and tourism, a deterioration of the economic outlook in the UK or a large sustained depreciation of the pound following its decision to leave the EU, would have negative impact on the UAE economy, which could be compounded by possible negative spillovers from the EU and downward pressures on oil prices. By contrast, possible rebalancing of oil markets or geopolitical tensions could raise global energy prices and support UAE’s fiscal and external positions. While the authorities broadly agreed on these risks and proposed policy responses, they pointed to other upside risks such as increased tourism and foreign investment due to the country’s safe-haven status.  Domestic risks. Dubai megaprojects, if not implemented prudently, may create additional macro-financial risks to GREs and banks, and ultimately to the fiscal position in light of the debt overhang from the 2008/9 global financial crisis. Authorities agreed and reiterated their commitment to continue strengthening the GREs’ balance sheets. Page 15 United Arab Emirates: Risk Assessment Matrix Impact if Realized Policy Response Lower oil exports and fiscal revenues. A $10 drop would worsen fiscal Sustained fiscal and external balances by 4 and 3½ percentage points of GDP consolidation. respectively assuming no policy response. Slowdown in non-oil growth. A permanent $10 drop in oil prices could Gradual fiscal consolidation reduce UAE GDP level by 2½ percentage points after five years that preserves investment. assuming that revenue losses are fully offset with expenditure cuts. Further economic Source of Risk Nature of the shock Persistently lower energy prices, triggered by supply factors reversing only gradually (High) Tighter banking liquidity and financial conditions, and a deterioration of asset quality in the banking sector. Tighter or more volatile Reversal of capital flows, higher risk premiums and possible valuation global financial conditions losses in sovereign wealth fund portfolios. (Medium) Rollover risks and liquidity strains on GREs. Surge in the US dollar Further appreciation of the dirham in effective terms leading to (High) competitiveness losses. Insufficient domestic policy reform to mitigate excessive risk taking by GREs (Medium) Imprudent risk taking and re-leveraging by GREs. diversification. Tap into SWFs to finance the deficit and strengthen capital adequacy, including through adequate provisioning while approving the insolvency regime for the corporate sector. The CBU should stand ready to provide liquidity to banks as needed. Further develop domestic debt markets to reduce reliance on foreign financing. Pursue active management of GREs debt, and avoid transfers of maturing debt by GREs to domestic banks. Pursue structural reforms to strengthen competitiveness. Strengthen debt management framework. Heightened risk of UAE’s external position could improve with higher oil prices. Maintain prudent policies. fragmentation/security dislocation in the Middle Increased spending, especially in assistance to conflict-ridden East (Medium) populations. Implement policies aimed at accelerating inclusive growth and further improving public services, including security. The. Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Colored boxes represent severity of impact. Red = High, Yellow =Medium, and Green = Low to Positive. Page 16