Lower oil prices are eroding long-standing fiscal and external surpluses, but negative effects on economic activity in the UAE have been limited since mid-2014 (Figures 1-5). UAE has continued to benefit not only from its perceived safe haven status but also from its large fiscal and external buffers that have helped limit negative spillovers from lower oil prices, sluggish global growth, and volatility in emerging market economies. Strong growth in the Dubai services sector and expansionary fiscal policies in Abu Dhabi helped cushion the effect of lower oil prices on the broader economy in 2014. Macro-financial stability risks have increased since end-2013. Lower oil prices and the appreciation of the effective exchange rate are weighing on the macroeconomic outlook and credit risks and have led to a tightening of monetary and financial conditions. Large external buffers have continued to limit inward spillover risks. The buildup of liquidity buffers in the banking system has helped reduce market and liquidity risks. Against this backdrop, reforms to strengthen macro-financial stability and continue economic diversification are critical. Consistent with IMF staff advice, the authorities have been implementing a number of reforms aimed at mitigating vulnerabilities and strengthening the macroeconomic policy framework, including bolstering the GRE and banking sectors and strengthening fiscal policy coordination and economic statistics. The new context of lower oil prices and the prospective normalization of US monetary policy calls for resuming fiscal consolidation, strengthening macroprudential, regulatory and supervisory frameworks, and pursuing economic diversification. 2. Inward spillover risks 3. Credit risks 4. Market and liquidity risks5. Monetary and financial conditions 6. Risk appetite 1. Macroeconomic risks 2013Q4 2014Q4 Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. UAE: FinancialStability Map, 2013–2014 RecommendationCurrent Status Gradual fiscal consolidationThe fiscal stance was expansionary with the adjusted nonhydrocarbon deficit increasing to 36.7 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP in 2014 from 35.4 percent in 2013. Strengthening the annual budget process and adopt a medium-term fiscal frameworkThe federal Ministry of Finance and the Dubai Department of Finance have strengthened budget processes and developed medium-term fiscal frameworks. The Abu Dhabi Department of Finance has submitted a draft medium-term budget framework prepared under the Abu Dhabi Comprehensive Financial Plan to the government for approval.Closely coordination and prioritizaton of GREs' planned projectsAbu Dhabi GREs have started to slow down nonessential projects. In Dubai, GRE projects continue to be implemented at a measured pace.Managing upcoming debt repayments proactivelyGREs have been proactive in managing debt repayments with Dubai World prepaying the 2015 maturity and rescheduling another large maturity due in 2018.Continuing to improve availability of information on Dubai GRE debtInformation on Dubai GRE debt is not collected at the level of the Dubai government. Those GREs that are listed disclose their financials in the annual reports.Further strengthening the toolkit available for enforcing bank supervision Included in the central bank draft law. Continuing to strengthen the regime for AML/CFTA recent regulation enhances the requirement to identify beneficial owners, including those of deposits.Developing the local debt marketAuthorities to push ahead with developing the domestic debt market to establish a benchmark yield curve.Source: IMF staff. Status of Staff Recommendations Made during the 2014 Article IV Consultation Page 10