Despite the sustained economic expansion, the U.S. faces a confluence of forces that will weigh on the prospects for continued gains in economic well being . A rising share of the U.S. labor force is shifting into retirement, basic infrastructure is aging, productivity gains are scanty, and labor markets and businesses appear less adept at reallocating human and physical capital. These growing headwinds are overlaid by pernicious secular trends in income: labor’s share of income is around 5 percentage points lower today than it was 15 years ago, the middle class has shrunk to its smallest size in the last 30 years, the income and wealth distribution are increasingly polarized, and poverty has risen. These secular trends both interact and reinforce each other . Demographic changes are slowing potential growth, delaying the renewal of business equipment, and depressing labor force dynamism. Reduced dynamism in the corporate sector has the potential to diminish innovation, deepen the loss of middle income jobs, and further polarize the income distribution. Income polarization itself can prevent productivity-improving investments in education by poorer households, lessen social mobility, add to economic insecurity, and limit consumption prospects. The causes of and interactions between these various forces are complex and not well understood. Skill- biased technological change, the more globalized and integrated market for goods and labor, changing structures of industrial and labor markets, and insufficient offsetting domestic policy actions are all feeding into these dynamics. However, what is clear is that these trends are coinciding with a well-documented decline in potential growth (from above 3 percent in the early 2000s to below 2 percent today) that is being mirrored across a range of advanced and emerging economies. If left unchecked, these forces will continue to drag down both potential and actual growth, diminishing gains in living standards and worsening poverty. Page 22 Demographics are an immutable headwind. The aging of the baby boom generation is set to cause a fall in the growth of the working age population in the coming years as well as a steady decline in labor force participation. As a consequence, the labor force is projected to grow at just 0.5 percent per year over the next decade (significantly slower than the 0.9 percent growth of the past 25 years). Falling growth in the labor force and a higher dependency ratio will eat into potential growth and add to medium-term fiscal challenges. Indeed, aging-related spending is forecast to cause an inflexion point in the public debt GDP ratio starting in 2019, raising concerns over the sustainability of the current medium-term fiscal trajectory (see below). Since the late 90s and early 00s, total factor productivity (TFP) in the U.S. has slowed significantly . TFP growth has been close to zero in the past 5 years and estimates of labor productivity have seen a similar decline. This slower productivity growth has been a global phenomenon and there is evidence it is related, at least in part, to a slower pace of innovation, a generalized decline in economic dynamism and the pace of new firm formation, rising firm concentration, falling labor market turnover, and the continued shift from manufacturing to services. There has been a marked decline in labor market dynamism. In contrast to the “job-less recovery” of the early 2000s, the current expansion has seen relatively healthy employment growth but wage gains have been anemic. Over one-half of the post-recession employment gains have been accounted for by the 55-and-over population who find themselves with insufficient income for retirement (and, as a result, are working later in life). In addition, churning—a measure of labor market dynamism that has been correlated with real wage growth—has followed a downward trend for both men and women, is at historically low levels, and seems connected to slower productivity growth (Box 4). un K gd J ili z + Page 23 Firm creation and destruction are also below historic levels. Business dynamism (i.e., business birth, growth, and exit) plays a critical role in the reallocation of resources from less-productive activities to more-productive ones. An important component of the observed fall in business dynamism has been a marked decline in firm startups and a decreasing role of young businesses in the economy. Since newer businesses have much higher innovation intensity than their more mature counterparts, their declining presence is eating into productivity. Contributing factors for this measured drag to dynamism include shifting patterns in the IT sector (which contributed substantially to business formation until the mid-2000s but has now matured as an industry) and increasing firm concentration (which is adding to the market power of incumbents and potentially acting as an implicit barrier to entry). The labor share of income has seen secular decline which began to accelerate in 2000 This is a phenomenon that has also been seen in other advanced economies. The evidence suggests a combination of factors are at work including wage competition from abroad, a compositional shift in GDP toward services (where the labor share is lower), and a decline in the labor share within manufacturing and industry (particularly for import- exposed sectors). Explanations for the latter range from a generalized decline in unionization rates, a shift of manufacturing activity to southern and western states that prohibit union security agreements, and an off-shoring of more labor- intensive tasks within manufacturing and industry. " " = ll ee Page 24 Box 4. The Decline of U.S. Dynamism Labor market fluidity. Since the late 1980s, American workers have been changing jobs less frequently . Quit and layoff rates have declined and job-to-job moves— a common practice for workers as they move up the wage ladder—have fallen by 40 percent. As a result workers are holding fewer jobs during their careers, reallocating less across sectors, and accumulating less transferable skills. The decline in job-to-job moves may also be a partial explanation behind lower wage growth and a falling labor share of income. Firm formation. The structure of the corporate sector is mirroring these labor market changes. The rate of business entry and exit has been on a secular decline. This was initially concentrated in a few sectors (e.g. retail) but, over the past 15 years, this declining pattern has broadened to include more innovative sectors such as technology. The link to productivity It has been no coincidence that, during this same period, the most productive firms have been growing at a slower pace. Within individual industries business concentration has risen and the dispersion of productivity across firms within a sector has grown. The decline in labor market fluidity could well have slowed the allocation of employee talent to productive firms and, in so doing, suppressed overall productivity growth. Why? Reasons for falling dynamism are difficult to untangle given the two-way causality between productivity and business or labor churning. Demographics and a changing industry mix explain only a small part of the decline. More favorable interpretations (such as more efficient job-matching) do not appear to be supported by the data. Recent research has focused on slow-moving structural causes although, empirically, the relative merits of these explanations are unclear: Greater hurdles for firms to enter and workers to reallocate due to rising legal and regulatory constraints (e.g. limits on at-will employment, noncompete agreements in labor contracts, or increasing barriers in business and occupational licensing); Changes in corporate business models that better exploit economies of scale, including greater vertical integration within a company, bounded by the constraints imposed by anti-trust rules; Evolving social preferences, including a diminishing willingness to take employment risks. S. Davis and J. Haltiwanger (2014) "Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance," NBER Working Papers 20479 and S. Danninger, “Is the US Labor Market Changing” IMF Working Paper (2016). R. A. Decker, J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2015). "Where Has All The Skewness Gone? The Decline In High-Growth (Young) Firms In The U.S," NBER Working Papers 21776. R. Molloy, C. L. Smith, R. Trezzi and A. Wozniak (2016) “Understanding declining fluidity in the U.S. labor market”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. J J nnu ll ll nu Page 25 Box 5. Polarization and Consumption Divergent paths. Since the 1970s, the real income of families in the low to middle income brackets have stagnated while real income growth of higher brackets has accelerated since the late 1990s. Polarization. Over the last four decades, many households have moved out of middle-income groups (defined as those earning 50–150 percent of the median income) and into the tails of the distribution. Since 2000, this “hollowing out” of the middle class, has been tilted more toward movements into the lower than the higher income ranks. Wealth. The net worth of households has also polarized. The real net worth of those groups who earn less than two-thirds of the median income is now 20 percent below where it was when the data started in 1983. Meanwhile the average real net worth of those earning more than twice the median income has doubled since 1983. Consequences. Staff estimates suggest that rising polarization has led to a lower aggregate consumption over the past 15 years, as more households have moved to the low-income tail of the distribution with more limited resources for consumption. In addition, empirical work shows that the overall marginal propensity to consume of these lower income groups has not increased. Staff estimates that these effects have lowered the level of aggregate consumption by about 3½ percent (equivalent to more than one year of consumption) since See A. Alichi, K. Kantenga, and J. Sole, “Income Polarization in the United States”, IMF Working Paper (2016) and “The American Middle Class is Losing Ground”, Pew Research Center (2016). W < > z q Page 26 The re-profiling of the economic structure, coupled with skill-biased technological progress in both services and manufacturing, has contributed to a shrinking of the share of the population in middle income jobs and a broader polarization of the income distribution (Box 5). Since the mid-1980s, the number of semi-skilled jobs paying incomes around the national median has fallen and jobs are instead being created either at the upper or lower ends of the occupational skill distribution. This phenomenon has been dubbed “job polarization”. At the same time, the earnings of workers remaining in the middle and lower segments of the skill distribution have stagnated or fallen. A direct consequence has been the “hollowing out” of the income distribution. The share of households earning between 50 and 150 percent of the median income has fallen from 58 to 46 percent over the past 45 years. An even more pronounced but connected trend has taken place in the polarization of the wealth distribution. This has had broad, macro-relevant, consequences for consumer behavior, human capital accumulation, and the housing market. In parallel with the polarization of the income and skills distribution, there has been a steady increase in poverty in the U.S. In the latest data, 1 in 7 Americans are living in poverty, including 1 in 5 children and 1 in 3 female-headed households. Further, around 40 percent of those in poverty are working. The incidence of poverty has been unusually persistent even as the economic expansion has matured. Poverty levels today are higher across age cohorts and for both men and for women. All of the progress that was made in lowering poverty during the 1990s has now been unwound. There are overlapping factors at work that include a greater premium for skills, a declining progressivity of the tax system, compositional changes in sectoral employment and educational attainment, as well as the broader economic dislocation triggered by the financial crisis. z q dd cc un ili pp Page 27