Monetary conditions remain accommodative . Current monetary policy settings—a policy rate of 0.5 percent and QE assets of £375 billion—have remained unchanged since the last Article IV consultation. Monetary policy should stay on hold until inflationary pressures are clearer Both headline and core inflation are well below target. Forward-looking indicators—such as inflation expectations and wage growth in excess of productivity growth—are also well- contained (Figure 1). Page 18 While the output gap is nearly closed, continued monetary policy accommodation is likely to be needed to keep the output gap from re-opening, given the moderate acceleration of fiscal consolidation. Moreover, risks to policy errors are asymmetric, as the costs to inflation undershooting likely exceed those of overshooting due to the increased complications related to easing monetary policy when interest rates are near the effective lower bound (ELB). In this regard, some moderate overshooting of the 2 percent target may even be desirable to more firmly escape the ELB. Current monetary policy settings thus remain appropriate until inflationary pressures become stronger. However, policy should also stay data dependent and may need to adjust quickly if conditions change, especially if core inflation or wage growth in excess of productivity growth rises quickly. The medium-term neutral real rate is likely to be lower than before the crisis . Market expectations of future interest rates, as indicated by long-term bond yields, have fallen sharply over the last two decades, likely reflecting high global savings and lower potential growth due to slower population growth, among other factors. A lower neutral rate has at least two important implications First, it implies that the current policy rate may not be providing as much monetary stimulus as it may initially appear. This in turn may partly explain why inflationary pressures remain modest despite a nearly closed output gap and further underscores the case for keeping rates on hold. Second, a lower neutral rate implies that the odds of hitting the ELB will be higher going forward than in the past. Consequently, contingency planning for addressing ELB-related problems that may arise again over the longer run is welcome. Such planning could include, for example, ensuring that the financial sector’s IT systems and legal contracts can incorporate negative interest rates, among other issues. Authorities’ views Monetary policy settings were viewed as appropriate . When the MPC judges it appropriate to raise Bank Rate, careful communication will be important to ensure a smooth lift-off. The BoE reiterated that the process of normalizing monetary policy should begin with rises in Bank Rate and proceed gradually—with the neutral rate likely to remain below levels seen prior to the financial crisis—and that QE asset sales should only be considered once Bank Rate had reached a level from which it could be cut materially in the face of a negative shock. -10123456Jan-92Nov-96Sep-01Jul-06May-11 10-Year 20-Year UK: Real Yields on Government Securities 1/ 1/ Real yields based on retail price index inflation, which tends to run somewhat higher than CPI inflation.Source: Haver.Dec-15 Page 19