The UK’s banking sector has become more resilient in recent years in line with tougher regulatory requirements Capital . In preparation for the full implementation of Basel III in January 2019, UK banks have steadily strengthened their capital positions (text table). In aggregate, the ratio of common equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital to risk- weighted assets for major UK banks reached 12.0 percent in September 2015—up from 7.2 percent in 2011 and well above regulatory minima. Effective January 2016, the major UK banks must also satisfy leverage ratio requirements. The aggregate Basel III leverage ratio for major banks reached 4.7 percent in September 2015, also well above regulatory minima. The capital ratios of major UK banks were also broadly in line with those of their peers in other advanced economies. Specific regulatory minima for CET1 and leverage ratios differ across banks, depending on their systemic importance. 2000-0620112012201320142015 2/ Capital adequacy Basel III common equity Tier 1 capital ratio…7.28.410.011.312.0Simple leverage ratio4.85.15.15.65.96.3Basel III leverage ratio (2014 proposal)…………4.44.6…………… Asset quality 1/ Non-performing loans net of provisions to capital…16.113.99.55.4…Non-performing loans to total gross loans…4.03.63.11.8……………… Profitability Return on assets before tax1.10.40.20.30.50.3 Price-to-book ratio224.657.081.0106.096.085.0…………… Liquidity Loan-to-deposit ratio113.1108.9103.199.196.097.4Short-term wholesale funding ratio…18.816.414.112.6…Average senior CDS spread…2.71.51.00.60.7 Financial Soundness Indicators for Major UK Banks 1/ Sources: BoE FPC Core Indicators, IMF Financial Soundness Indicators.1/ The coverage of banks is as defined in the BoE's December Financial Stability Report, except for asset quality indicators, for which the coverage is as defined in the IMF's Financial Soundness Indicators.2/ 2015 latest available data. a Supplementary Leverage Ratio 1/ UK banks include Barclays, LBG, RBS, and HSBC. Source: SNL European G-SIBs: CET1 and Leverage Ratios, 2015:Q3 (Percent; selected UK banks in red 1/) Page 20 Asset quality . Stronger capital positions have been supported by improving asset quality, with the non-performing loan ratio falling to 1.8 percent at end-2014—less than half its post-crisis peak (text table, Figure 4). Since the global financial crisis, UK banks have shifted the composition of their loan portfolios towards domestic lending and away from foreign lending and reduced their direct credit exposures to both other banks and nonbank financial institutions, lowering their interconnectedness. Profitability . Profitability, however, remains low relative to historic levels. In aggregate, UK banks currently generate a return on assets about half that prior to the global financial crisis (text table, Figure 4). In parallel, the shares of the major UK banks now trade at around their book value, about half the multiple prior to the global financial crisis. The weak profitability of UK banks in recent years has been driven by lower trading income, lower net interest income, and high misconduct costs. Liquidity . UK banks have strengthened their liquidity positions, with most major banks disclosing that they have already satisfied the full Basel III end-point liquidity coverage ratio requirement of 100 percent. Banks have also reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding while increasing deposits (text table, Figure 4), raising the overall stability of their funding. The government still has ownership stakes in Lloyds Banking Group (LBG) and the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), as legacies from crisis bailouts . With a business model focused on UK mortgage lending, LBG has benefited from robust UK growth. The government plans to divest its remaining ownership stake of less than 10 percent in the near future as market conditions allow. In contrast, RBS remains in the midst of a major restructuring and deleveraging, designed to simplify its business model and make it more domestically oriented. The government plans to divest at least three-quarters of its 73 percent ownership stake gradually over the course of this parliament. The banking sector’s resilience to shocks is now regularly assessed by stress tests The 2015 stress test scenario featured a deep global macroeconomic downturn accompanied by an abrupt tightening of financial conditions, concentrated in China and the Euro Area. The test also incorporated severe but plausible future misconduct costs. The results, released in December 2015, indicate that all seven major UK banks—which collectively account for over 80 percent of domestic bank credit provision to the domestic economy—have the capacity to maintain lending under such a scenario, given their capital plans, including actions taken in 2015 (e.g., Standard Chartered announced in November 2015 that it planned to raise $5.1 billion in shares and cut 15,000 jobs). Beginning in 2016, the BoE plans to conduct two banking sector stress tests per year, combining an annual cyclical scenario—the severity of which will vary with the financial cycle—with a biennial exploratory scenario designed to probe resilience to other risks in between the biennial European Banking Authority stress tests. Going forward, the integration of systemically important nonbank financial institutions, such as central counterparties (CCPs), into the stress- testing framework should be a priority. Page 21 Balance sheet repair has helped shift aggregate bank credit growth back into slightly positive territory, supporting economic activity . Going forward, bank credit growth is expected to converge gradually toward nominal GDP growth rates, now that the bank credit-to-GDP ratio has returned near pre-boom levels (i.e., circa 2000). As the credit cycle shifts and the new regulatory architecture sets in, continuation of an intrusive and conservative approach to supervision and regulation will be essential . UK financial sector stability is essential not only for domestic macro-stability, but also to avoid adverse outward spillovers to the rest of the world, given the UK’s role as a global financial center. Priorities for reducing risks include the following: Addressing emerging risks early . Given its central coordinating role in maintaining financial stability, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) needs to continue scanning the horizon for emerging systemic risks, while taking action in concert with the Prudential Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority to remove or reduce them. In this context, the authorities should, in addition to their ongoing monitoring of large financial institutions, continue to monitor systemic risk arising from small and medium-sized financial institutions—which tend to have correlated business models—through robust thematic microprudential supervision. Also, the authorities’ recent efforts to push banks to bolster resilience to cyber attacks are welcome. Countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) . As the incipient financial cycle upturn in the UK gains momentum, the FPC should raise the CCB from its current level of 0 percent and continue raising it as warranted by credit conditions. While this is unlikely to significantly moderate the financial cycle, it will enhance the resilience of the banking sector in line with the level of systemic risk it faces. In this regard, the FPC indicated in November 2015 that a hike in the near future was likely, though any initial increase in the CCB would likely be at least partly offset by reductions in existing buffers, such that the first CCB hikes would probably not add to total capital requirements for individual banks, but rather increase the transparency of the nature of these buffers. 25Jan-00Aug-02Mar-05Oct-07May-10Dec-12 To private nonfinancial sector To households To nonfinancial corps UK: Lending Growth 1/ (Y-o-y percent change) Source: Haver.1/ Lending by monetary financial institutions.Mar-15 Page 22 Risk weights . Supervisors should also continue to carefully scrutinize risk weights in banks’ internal models, including to ensure that they are not overly pro-cyclical. Although the leverage ratio requirement helps mitigate risks associated with internal models, heavy reliance on the leverage ratio as the binding capital adequacy constraint could incentivize banks to adopt excessively risky lending behavior. In this context, recently announced plans by the Basel Committee—in which the UK plays an important role—to complete work to address the problem of excessive variability in risk weights by end-2016 are welcome. Should the authorities identify immediate risks, the imposition of sectoral risk-weight floors and heightened risk-weight disclosure requirements should also be considered. A comprehensive set of arrangements to support bank resolution is being established The UK regulatory framework includes three main elements relevant to resolution: Ring-fencing . Effective January 2019, the major UK banks will be required to ring-fence their core retail operations, insulating them from risks arising in their investment banking arms. The Prudential Regulation Authority plans to complete its consultation process and publish final ring-fencing rules well before January 2019, to give banks sufficient time to implement them. Total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) . The Financial Stability Board recently finalized a TLAC standard for global systemically-important banks (G-SIBs)—of which the UK is the home jurisdiction for four—designed to ensure that they have sufficient equity plus eligible liabilities to absorb losses and be recapitalized in resolution. Consistent with the EU’s Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, the BoE plans to impose a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) on all UK banks that will apply as of January 2019 for G-SIBs and January 2020 for other banks. For UK G-SIBs, MREL will be set so as to implement the FSB’s TLAC standard. Resolution planning . The BoE conducts resolution planning for all UK banks, which will be required to remove any substantive barriers identified to implementing the BoE’s preferred resolution strategy. Discussions are also ongoing with other jurisdictions on the issue of clarifying modalities for cross-border resolution. These complementary requirements aim to mitigate the too-big-to-fail problem by (i) reducing the likelihood of a systemic banking crisis by subjecting the major banks to greater market discipline through their funding costs and (ii) reducing the macroeconomic costs of a major bank failure by facilitating orderly resolution while insulating taxpayers from losses. Page 23 It will be equally important to continue closely monitoring risks in nonbanks Nonbank financial institutions now account for nearly 50 percent of UK financial sector assets, up from less than 40 percent prior to the global financial crisis. This expansion has been concentrated among broker-dealers, pension funds, and investment funds. The resilience of broker-dealers continues to improve, with their leverage ratios having roughly doubled since the global financial crisis. Nevertheless, it is important that the FPC continue to assess the adequacy of the regulatory perimeter to guard against the migration of financial stability risks outside of it. Another priority is to ensure that UK insurers are resilient to the low interest-rate environment. Although insurers’ assets and liabilities have well-matched durations, the low interest-rate environment has steadily eroded their investment income as maturing assets have been reinvested in lower-yielding securities. Nevertheless, UK insurers are sufficiently capitalized to withstand the stresses specified by Solvency II, which came into force in January 2016. The ongoing FSAP, which is due to be completed in mid-2016, will be an opportunity to further assess the adequacy of steps taken to reduce risks in nonbanks, as well as to review broader changes (e.g., the liquidity framework) to the financial sector framework since the last FSAP in The reform of ethics and conduct in the financial sector is ongoing . Financial institutions in the UK have been charged substantial misconduct costs, and the restoration of public trust in the ethical underpinnings of the financial sector remains elusive. The UK authorities are strengthening incentives for financial institutions to provide financial services in an ethical manner, in part by pushing accountability for misconduct down to the individual level, including via new measures such as the Senior Managers Regime, which increases the responsibility of managers for misconduct that occurs on their watch. Applying effective, proportionate, and dissuasive sanctions for misconduct, including for AML/CFT violations, should enhance compliance and promote financial integrity. The authorities’ efforts to promote global standards for the ethical provision of financial services are welcome. Authorities’ Views Post-crisis reforms were viewed as having bolstered financial sector resilience, though challenges remain . The FPC judged that, on a system-wide basis, significant further capital-raising was unlikely to be required. As a result, it foresees the sector transitioning to a more neutral phase of the cycle in which credit growth is more able to support sustainable growth. At the same time, newer risks, such as those related to cyber-security and expansion of the nonbank financial sector, were gaining prominence and warranted close attention. On mortgage risk weights, the BoE agreed that in some cases these were too pro-cyclical, but emphasized that leverage ratio requirements, stress testing, and hypothetical portfolio exercises provided mitigating backstops, as did measures under Pillar II of the Basel framework. Page 24