FY15/16 outturn The public sector fiscal deficit fell to about 4 percent of GDP in FY15/16, though the debt ratio continued to rise (Figure 4, Table 3) The deficit outturn was broadly in line with projections at the time of the 2015 Autumn Statement. However, the government’s debt target, which requires public sector net debt to fall as a percent of GDP in each year to FY19–20, was not met in FY15/16, in part due to downward revisions to nominal GDP. The deficit remains relatively high by international standards, as to a lesser degree does the debt ratio. The UK’s fiscal year starts in April. AUSAUTBELCANCYPCZEDNKESTFINFRADEU GRC HKGISLIRLISRITA JPN KOR LVALTULUXMLTNLDNZLNORPRTSMRSGPSVKSVNESPSWECHETWN GBR USA n r a l v r n m n t r ss b t General Government Deficit Sources:WEO; and IMF staff projections. General Government Deficit and Gross Debt, 2015 Page 22 March 2016 budget The March 2016 budget continues to target consolidation, but further smoothes the pace The March budget avoided undertaking additional tightening in the near term to offset lower revenue projections, following the growth downgrade by the OBR. This lack of an active near- term response implied a modest easing of the pace of structural fiscal adjustment in FY16/17, given that part of the growth downgrade was deemed to be structural. Instead, additional adjustment was backloaded to FY19/20. This allowed the budget to remain consistent with the government’s main fiscal rule, which is to achieve and maintain a budget surplus starting in FY19/20, unless the economy is hit by a significant negative shock, defined as projected real GDP growth of less than 1 percent on a rolling 4 quarter- on-4 quarter basis. Under the new fiscal path, the pace of consolidation is now broadly constant at around 1 percentage point of GDP per year through FY19/20, especially after adjusting for the effects of shifts in the timing of corporation tax payments (blue dotted line in the text chart), which affects the officially measured pace of adjustment but is unlikely to have substantive effects on economic activity. Public sector net debt is projected to start declining as a percent of GDP from FY16/17 onward (Table 3). Consolidation remains mostly expenditure-based, with new measures in the 2016 budget having only modest fiscal effects . Notable measures include higher taxes on commercial property, tighter restrictions on tax avoidance, lower business taxes, and accelerated infrastructure spending. Admirably, the budget continues to maintain foreign development assistance at 0.7 percent of gross national income in an environment of significant overall spending restraint. However, new measures in the March budget do not address some of the deeper reform needs highlighted in past Article IV reports, such as reforming distortionary tax expenditures. FY2015FY2016FY2017FY2018FY2019FY2020 Revenue Expenditure UK: Changes in Primary Balance (Percent of GDP, cumulative from FY2014) Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. FY15/16FY16/17FY17/18FY18/19FY19/20FY20/21 2015 Autumn Statement 2015 Autumn Statement adjusted 1/ 2016 March Budget 2016 March Budget adjusted 1/ UK: Pace of Fiscal Consolidation (Change in cyclically-adjusted primary balance (CAPB), percent of GDP) Sources: Office for Budget Responsibility; and IMF staff calculations.1/ The CAPB is adjusted by taking out the effect of the change in corporation tax payment dates for companies with taxable profits over £20 million. Page 23 The smoothing of the adjustment path and increased backloading of consolidation was appropriate . The lack of additional discretionary tightening in the near term in response to larger deficit projections was appropriate given the weaker near-term outlook, the need to support demand, and the heightened near-term uncertainty. This new pace of structural adjustment, which is essentially unchanged from last year, is appropriate in a baseline in which growth strengthens later this year following a Remain vote, given that the output gap is essentially closed, the employment rate is at a record high, and financial conditions continue to ease in line with stronger bank balance sheets. Moderate fiscal consolidation in such a scenario will help rebuild fiscal buffers to allow a more forceful countercyclical response during the next downturn. More generally, the pace of consolidation should be broadly calibrated to cyclical conditions. In this context, the UK has fiscal space to ease further if this becomes necessary . The UK has room to ease in the sense that, in the baseline of a Remain vote, a moderate fiscal easing is unlikely to trigger a significant rise in sovereign bond yields. In the event of an extended period of sluggish demand growth and inflation undershooting, the government should use this fiscal space and the flexibility in its fiscal framework to halt structural adjustment and, if necessary, move to stimulus. Automatic stabilizers should also be allowed to operate freely and symmetrically. In addition, the envisaged reductions in some categories of expenditure remain sizable, and the government may need to show flexibility in finding alternative fiscal measures if anticipated spending efficiency gains fail to materialize. Structural fiscal reforms Pro-growth and pro-stability aspects of the consolidation could be further strengthened . Specific reform options include the following: Boosting infrastructure . Spending on infrastructure has been increased in recent budgets, but further efforts could be made in this direction, given that needs in this area are still high and given that public investment is still below the average in other advanced economies. Higher infrastructure spending could be funded by reforms such as those below. See the 2015 Article IV report for further discussion of the government’s fiscal framework. UKAdvanced economy averageEU advanced economy average Public Investment, 2015 Source: WEO.Notes: Public investment is defined as public gross fixed capital formation. Page 24 Reforming taxes Scaling back distortionary tax expenditures (e.g., nonstandard zero VAT rates) could improve efficiency, increase tax neutrality, and free up resources for growth-enhancing expenditure. Property tax reform, along the lines recommended in the Mirrlees Review , could help reduce vulnerabilities in the housing market by easing supply constraints. For example, rebalancing taxation away from transactions and towards property values could boost mobility and encourage more efficient use of the housing stock. The 2016 budget announced reforms to transaction taxes on commercial properties that aim to eliminate cliff-edges in marginal tax rates, in line with recent reforms to transaction taxes on residential properties. These reforms helpfully reduce some distortions in the current system, but the fundamental problem of high reliance on transaction taxes remains (see 2015 Selected Issues). Reducing the tax code’s bias toward debt could also promote financial stability. This could be achieved by, for example, adopting an Allowance for Corporate Equity, with offsetting changes in other corporate tax parameters to ensure revenue neutrality. Reforming pensions . State pensions are currently subject to a “triple-lock” guarantee, which requires that they rise each year by the highest of CPI inflation, wage inflation, or 2.5 percent. This approach is costly, poorly targeted to those most in need, and inconsistent with international best practice, which is generally to maintain a constant real income in retirement via indexation only to the CPI. Staff simulations suggest that moving to CPI indexation could save over 0.5 percent of GDP by the end of a 10-year horizon, enough to increase gross public investment by 20 percent. Authorities’ views The authorities viewed their fiscal plans as key to bolstering buffers against shocks They emphasized that responsible fiscal policy requires building buffers while growth rates remain near potential and the output gap is closed, in order to provide flexibility to allow the automatic stabilizers to operate freely in the event of future shocks. In this context, they agreed with the need to maintain fiscal flexibility in the event of large shocks and noted that their fiscal framework requiring a budget surplus starting in FY19/20 provides for such flexibility, given both its “comply or The government estimates that total tax expenditures equal about 6.5 percent of GDP, though many of these have some economic justification and not all are distortionary. CPI Indexation vs. Triple Lock (Difference in pension spending, percent of GDP) Sources: IMF staff calculations.Note: This chart shows the difference in pension spending under the triple lock scheme and CPI indexation, based on simulated mean growth rates under the two different indexation schemes. The simulation does not take account of changes in cohorts/ demographics or changes in the pension system. Page 25 explain” nature and its explicit escape clause in the event that the economy is hit by a significant negative shock. On the composition of consolidation, the authorities viewed their plans as supporting growth by facilitating a competitive, lower-tax economic environment while prioritizing spending in key areas such as health, science, education, and infrastructure investment, as well as foreign development assistance.