The UAE continues to benefit from its perceived safe-haven status amid regional instability. Against a backdrop of political stability, confidence has further increased, tourism and hospitality have expanded, and capital inflows have continued. The real estate sector, which had been impaired since the 2008/9 crisis, has been recovering quickly, especially in the Dubai residential market. Economic diversification efforts are ongoing. Dubai continues to expand its role as a hub for retail and wholesale trade, as well as a major tourism and real estate investment destination for the wider region. Dubai’s successful bid for the World Expo 2020 is expected to further increase confidence and growth in the medium term Abu Dhabi, while continuing to expand its hydrocarbon production capacity, is pursuing an economic diversification strategy into areas such as petrochemicals, logistics, financial services, aviation, renewable energy, and cultural tourism. Meanwhile, consistent with IMF staff advice, the authorities have been implementing a number of reforms aimed at mitigating vulnerabilities and strengthening the macroeconomic policy framework, including bolstering the GRE and banking sectors and strengthening fiscal policy coordination and economic statistics. Status of Staff Recommendations Made during the 2013 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Current Status Continue fiscal consolidation Continue to focus on strengthening the GRE sector Consider targeted increases in real-estate-related fees Introduce new prudential regulations for mortgage lending and loan concentration Further strengthen fiscal policy coordination Further improve economic statistics Source: IMF staff. The fiscal stance in 2013 tightened by around 1 percent of non-hydrocarbon GDP, about half of what had been expected. The consolidated 2014 budget implies significant consolidation. All major debt restructurings from the 2008/9 crisis have been completed, and large intergovernmental maturities have been rolled over. GREs have made progress with selling assets and partially prepaying maturities. Further progress is needed in strengthening the transparency and coordination of GREs. Dubai authorities raised the real estate registration fee from 2 percent to 4 percent in October 2013, and regulatory measures to assure orderly market conditions for new real estate development were introduced. The Central Bank introduced new maximum loan-to-value ratios for mortgage lending, debt-service-to- income limits, and loan concentration limits for GREs and local governments in early 2014. The Ministry of Finance compiles consolidated fiscal data in the GFS 2001 format for the federal and emirate governments. The authorities have improved GFS reporting, started a project to compile the international investment position, and have begun implementing an international transactions reporting system for the balance of payments. Page 6