The UK economy continues to grow steadily . Output expanded by about 2¼ percent in 2015, following a nearly 3 percent expansion in 2014. With recent upward revisions also to growth estimates for 2011–13, the UK’s post-crisis recovery path now looks similar to that of the US. The recovery has been led by private domestic demand, which has more than offset weak external demand and ongoing fiscal consolidation (Tables 1–2). Remaining economic slack is limited Standard models suggest that the output gap is nearly closed, as the unemployment rate and capacity utilization have returned to pre-crisis levels (Figures 1–2). Productivity growth remains low, but has recently started to tick upward Productivity growth has been very weak during the recovery, averaging only 0.4 percent (annualized growth in output per hour worked) during 2010–14, well below the 2.2 percent productivity growth rate observed during the decade before the crisis. This productivity slowdown likely reflects a combination of factors. Some of these may be structural, given the broad-based slowdown in productivity growth across advanced economies that predates the crisis, possibly reflecting changes in the nature of technological progress, increased difficulties in measuring it, and/or changes in the pace of knowledge-based capital accumulation, among other factors. However, part of the slowdown may also be cyclical and therefore temporary, reflecting factors such as the post-crisis impairment of credit markets inhibiting the flow of investment to more productive sectors (see the companion paper). More recently, productivity growth has started to rise somewhat, reaching 1.3 percent (y/y) in the third quarter of 2015 (Figure 1). Looking forward, staff expects steady economic growth to continue in 2016 . Lower commodity import prices, higher global growth, buoyant residential and commercial real estate prices (which should encourage investment), and ongoing monetary policy accommodation are expected to support expansion, offsetting headwinds from a moderate acceleration of fiscal consolidation (Table 3). On balance, staff projects growth in 2016 to remain around 2.2 percent. Staff projects growth to average around 2.2 percent over the medium term, as well This is based on the following assumptions: 2007Q12009Q22011Q32013Q4 UK US Eurozone Source: Haver. UK: Real GDP per Working Age Population (2009 Q2=100) 2015Q3 Page 11 labor productivity growth continues its recent acceleration, eventually reaching 1.7 percent, (Table 2), but does not fully revert to pre-crisis productivity growth rates, given the possible structural factors behind lower productivity growth mentioned above; and employment growth slows to around 0.5 percent in the medium term; this projection assumes that (i) the population expands as projected by the Office for National Statistics (ONS), (ii) the employment rate for those age 16–64, which recently hit a record high, soon stabilizes, and (iii) the employment rate of those age 65+ continues to rise in line with the trend over the last decade, due to ongoing increases in longevity and the state pension age. Inflationary pressures remain subdued As of December 2015, headline inflation was near a record low at 0.2 percent; core inflation was also subdued at 1.4 percent. Low inflation partly reflects lower import prices due to (i) the 15 percent appreciation of the NEER between Spring 2013 and end-2015 and (ii) the large drop in commodity prices since mid- 2014. However, domestic drivers of inflation have also been muted, with nominal private-sector wages growing by only 2.1 percent as of November 2015 (Figure 1). Even if productivity growth remains in the range of only 1 percent, this pace of wage growth would still be consistent with underlying inflation of only around 1.1 percent. Consequently, markets do not expect the BoE to raise its policy rate (currently 0.5 percent) until 2017. Under this scenario, staff expects inflation to rise gradually to 2 percent by end-2017, as effects from past exchange rate appreciation and commodity price declines dissipate and assuming a gradual rise in wage growth in response to tighter labor markets.