The economy has rebounded strongly: Growth has accelerated since the second half of 2013 and leading indicators suggest that the recovery has momentum. After expanding by just 0.3 percent in 2012, real GDP grew by 1.7 percent in 2013, nearly twice the projection in the 2013 Article IV Staff Report. Faster-than- expected growth is associated with easier credit conditions and improved consumer confidence. Growth in 2013 was projected to be 0.9 percent in the 2013 Article IV staff report. Manufacturing Construction Services PMI (50+: expansion, SA)Source: Haver/ONS. Gfk Consumer Confidence Barometer Source: Haver/ONS. Page 6 The recovery is becoming more balanced. Recovery was initially led by a sharp uptick in private consumption, accounted for by a decline in household saving rates. More recently, business investment has picked up, consistent with a classic “accelerator” cycle, and surveys of investor intentions point to further momentum going forward. Net trade made only a modest contribution to growth in 2013. On the production side, all sectors have performed strongly. But slack remains. Although surveys show above- average capacity utilization, several indicators suggest that there is spare capacity in the economy from the labor market: for example, even with strong employment growth, unemployment is above average, currently at 6.6 percent, and there remain substantial numbers of involuntarily part-time workers. Staff estimates that the output gap will narrow to 1.3 percent of potential GDP in 2014, consistent with the authorities’ estimates (Figure 1). Productivity growth has yet to recover. Low productivity growth has been a striking feature of the recovery. From an accounting perspective, the poor performance is explained by relatively weak GDP growth and strong employment growth. Having persisted for so long, it seems unlikely that weak productivity could be attributed to labor hoarding, and it can only partially be explained by upward revisions in GDP data. Instead, two factors appear relevant: first, previous problems in credit markets appear to have inhibited the flow of investment to more productive sectors; second, an increase in labor supply, reflecting notably a shift towards later retirement, has allowed firms to substitute toward labor relatively easily and cheaply. H H Private Consumption Public Consumption Fixed Capital Formation Net Exports Other GDP Contributions to Growth (Annual percent change; percentage points)Source: Haver/ONS. Labor Productivity (growth rate, left scale) Labor Productivity (Index 2007Q1 = 100, right scale) Labor Productivity Sources: Haver/ONS; and IMF staff calculations. Headline Inflation Core Inflation Inflation Expectations 1/ Inflation and Inflation Expectations Sources: Bank of England; and ONS. 1/ BoE/GfK Inflation Survey: Inflation Next 12 Mos: Median Response(NSA) . Nominal Wages ex. bonuses (3 mma) Unit Labor Cost Nominal Wages and Unit Labor Costs (Y/Y percent change, SA) Source: Haver/ONS. Page 7 Inflation has fallen and cost pressures are contained. Despite the recent rebound in demand and flat productivity growth since the onset of the crisis, headline inflation has fallen rapidly, to 1.5 percent, after being well above the 2 percent inflation target over the past four years. This fall reflects the end of administered price increases, reduced pressures from import prices, and weak growth in wages and margins owing to slack in labor and goods markets, despite recent strong employment and output growth. But house prices are rising rapidly, and over an increasingly wide area. House price inflation is notably high in London, with levels now 32 percent above those before the crisis, reflecting strong foreign demand for premium properties, and demographic pressures (Figure 2). Price rises are becoming geographically more widespread, even though transaction volumes are still below historic averages overall. Price:income multiples—and, with them, loan:income multiples—are increasing. Interest servicing costs remain at historic lows, mitigating the effects of higher prices on affordability, but also implying that households could be vulnerable to interest rate increases. There are some recent signs of deceleration in house prices, but these might only reflect a temporary slow-down as lenders learn new loan approval procedures following the recent implementation of the Mortgage Market Review (MMR). Further, household debt has stabilized at about 140 percent of households’ gross disposable income, a historically-high level for the beginning of a house price cycle, and historical experience of the UK’s relatively large house price swings suggests caution. The current account has worsened, and sterling is modestly overvalued. The current account deficit rose to 4½ percent of GDP in 2013, explained by a large decline in the income balance and lackluster export growth. The net international investment position (NIIP) improved from -15 percent of GDP in 2012 to -2 percent in 2013. As it stands, the net external position is not a concern at the moment. However, given substantial gross positions, revaluations can easily lead to substantial changes in the net position, suggesting that the current value of the NIIP should not lead to complacent view about external sustainability. After depreciating by 23 percent in 2007–09 the real exchange rate has gradually appreciated, and this trend accelerated from the middle of 2013. Staff estimates that the current account balance is 2.6 percent weaker than its equilibrium level, and that the real exchange rate is overvalued by about 5–10 percent. (For further details, see Annex 1.) Housing and Business Cycles: Is the UK Different from Other Advanced Economies? Selected Issues Paper. The income balance in 2013 was the lowest in the post-war period and substantially lower than the average 1 percent surplus of GDP during 1997–2011. The decline appears to be temporary, owing to weak foreign profits, notably of firms exposed to the euro area. Such estimates are made using historically-typical trade elasticities. It should be noted, however, that the depreciation over the period 2008–09 did not bring about as large an improvement in the trade balance as might be expected, suggesting caution about the effects of a future depreciation. Page 8