Monetary policy has been highly accommodative. Bank rate and QE balances have remained unchanged, and the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) was modified to favor lending to firms. The Bank of England formally implemented a policy of “forward guidance” in August 2013, very similar to that employed by the Federal Reserve. Effective monetary conditions have eased further: Spreads over funding rates have compressed, especially for secured lending and consumer credit, and have made corporate debt issuance especially attractive. The flow of credit has increased, reflecting both demand and supply factors. After declining during 2010–12, consumer credit rebounded strongly in 2013 and has continued to grow at rates of around 5 percent, year-on-year. The growth of net secured lending has been less spectacular, at around 1 percent, year-on-year, but both gross lending and repayments have picked up strongly. Net lending to businesses over the year is still negative, but the rate of decline has slowed and shows signs of stabilizing. The impact of a disorderly exit from accommodative monetary policy in the US, which leads to a sharp rise in yields and affects non-banks and banks through the collateral channel, has been a particular focus of this year’s Spillover Report analysis for the UK. Bank of England has maintained Bank rate at 0.5 percent since April 2009. The Bank has kept a stock of £375bn of gilts on the books of the Asset Purchase Facility since October 2012. The FLS, introduced in 2012, provided a collateral swap to lower funding costs for banks that increase any net lending. A new version of the FLS, which came into effect in February 2014 and runs into 2015, no longer supports new loans to households and favors SME lending. Since its inception, lenders have drawn £43.3 billion from the FLS, and marginal wholesale funding costs have fallen around 150–200 basis points. The policy was that policy rates would be held fixed and the stock of assets purchased not reduced at least until the unemployment rate had fallen to 7 percent, so long as: (i) projected CPI inflation 18 to 24 months ahead were no more than ½ percentage point above the 2 percent target; (ii) medium-term inflation expectations remained sufficiently well anchored; and (iii) there were no substantial threat to financial stability that could not be contained by tools available to the Financial Policy Committee. In February 2014, the unemployment threshold the Bank had set as a precondition for a rate hike was de-emphasized, with the Bank now communicating that the appropriate path for Bank rate to eliminate slack over the next 2-3 years and keep inflation at target would likely be gradual. Page 10 Monetary policy should stay accommodative—for now. With cost pressures contained and still some excess supply, accommodative monetary policy is appropriate. Policy might, however, have to be tightened quickly if costs run ahead of productivity growth or slack is absorbed, and should be considered if financial stability concerns cannot otherwise be addressed. There are important macroeconomic arguments for raising Bank rate before reducing QE balances, but operational imperatives may warrant a more flexible approach to sequencing. When the time comes to begin normalizing monetary conditions, raising the policy rate first is preferable, from a macroeconomic policy point of view, to selling off assets: the MPC will likely find it easier to fine tune policy tightening using familiar tools like interest rate increases, an important consideration while the recovery is still gathering strength, and should changing conditions require reversing the normalization, the MPC would likely find it easier to calibrate the response by decreasing the policy rate rather than by repurchasing gilts. There is considerable uncertainty about the equilibrium level of demand for central bank reserves due to the new regulatory liquidity requirements. Ensuring the smooth functioning of the money market during policy renormalization may imply that the Bank has to drain some central bank reserves, for example, issuing at the same time as it starts to increase Bank rate. If interest rates rose and the BoE were to sell gilts, financial losses would likely be realized. However, the QE operation is fully indemnified by HMT: any financial losses (gains) as a result of the asset purchases should be borne by (owed to) HMT. The BoE has so far made profits from holding gilts, which have been transferred to HMT. However, based on the market’s expectations for interest rates, the OBR projects that the BoE would incur cash flow losses from 2017/18 onward, and the HMT would need to transfer cash to the BoE to cover these losses. g Household secured and unsecured credit 1/ Corporate bonds 2/ Bank loans to businesses 3/ Spreads Sources: Bank of England; BofA; Merrill Lynch; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Weighted average of interest rates charged on, inter alia, high-LTV and low-LTV mortgages, and unsecured loans, over corresponding risk-free reference rates (for methodology, see BoE Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q2, pp. 140-141).2/ Average of option-adjuted spreads for investment-grade and high-yield bonds over risk-free reference rates. 3/ Spread (over Bank rate) charged on new business loans. Quarterly Change in MFIs' Sterling Net Lending to Non-Financial Private Sector (SA, GBP billions)Source: Bank of England. Page 11 Box 1. Monetary Policy Communications The Bank of England has made important changes to its communications over past year, notably with the formal implementation of “forward guidance”. Looking ahead, the process of normalizing monetary conditions will put a premium on effective communication: the Bank will want to reduce the risks of adverse effects from surprises about changes in policy settings, yet not feed spurious certainty about future interest rates. This context raises questions: (i) how effective has forward guidance been, and (ii) what improvements could be made, if any, to communications about monetary policy? The introduction of forward guidance in August 2013 was associated with some confusion by markets and commentators as to its purpose. As characterized by MPC members, forward guidance was intended to improve transparency about the Bank’s reaction function. Nonetheless, many interpreted it as an attempt to directly stimulate by committing to “lower-for-longer” interest rates. Because forward guidance did not prevent UK yields rising with US yields as expectations of Fed “tapering” increased (even at short maturities), some concluded forward guidance had failed. In February 2014, the unemployment threshold was de- emphasized, causing some to question whether the policy was still active. With regard to its effectiveness in terms of transparency, data on implied volatilities indicate that uncertainty about future rates did indeed fall after introduction of forward guidance. But this evidence is not clear cut— implied vols of many asset classes have been falling steadily since the implementation of unconventional monetary policies. Viewed this way, it might be that the observed decline in volatility was a reversion to trend, after an exceptional period from the first “taper talk” in May to the “no taper” announcement in September, that should not necessarily be attributed to the introduction of forward guidance. The Bank has also used other forms of communication: speeches by MPC members have tried to alert markets to future interest rate increases, while the Inflation Report is now more explicit about key judgments and risks to projections. Currently, the Report stops short of showing what the MPC believes should happen to interest rates—the forecast is “conditioned” on market expectations. Forecasts could be based on the MPC’s preferred path for interest rates, removing a step markets have to take to deduce the MPC’s thinking. Uncertainty around the interest rate path could be indicated by a fan chart, just as with the current GDP and inflation forecasts, to make it clear that the path is simply a projection rather than a promise. MPC members might argue that a given interest rate path is not their preference; one approach would be to show how individual members place themselves relative to a “median” path. There remains, however, the problem that there is no guarantee that any exogenous interest rate path—regardless of whether it is from the market or an MPC member’s preferred reaction—is intertemporally consistent. That would require employing “target criteria”—rules to determine which of the many possible paths consistent with achieving the Bank’s mandate would be selected—and openly discussing these criteria with the public; in practice, that would probably require clear statements about how variables other than inflation, including financial market variables, affected judgments about desired interest rates. So far, few institutions have shown a willingness to be so transparent, and a move in that direction would require careful thought about interactions with FPC decisions. ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 1\ In fact, yield correlations increased compared with those before taper talk. Moreover, the exchange rate did not play the role of a buffer but appreciated during this period. One possibility is that there was also positive news about the UK economy, but that cannot completely account for the degree of comovement at daily frequencies. 2\ Interest rate projections have been shown for some years now by the central banks of the Czech Republic, Norway, Sweden, and New Zealand, the first three also showing fan charts. 3\ See Woodford, Michael, “Forward guidance by inflation-targeting central banks” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3, Special Issue. Page 12 Clarity is needed on the operational framework that will deliver the Bank’s target interest rate in the future. At the start of QE, the Bank moved away from its reserve averaging- cum-“corridor system” for Bank rate targeting, to the current “floor system” in which reserves are remunerated at the Bank rate. With prospects of a rate rise strengthening, the Bank will need to announce soon what the new monetary control framework will be and how the transition to it will be managed. An early pronouncement will enable banks to plan accordingly, and help reduce the possibility of a sudden surge in the volatility of short-term rates (after a long period of very low volatility) during renormalization. The Bank of England should continue to point to a forthcoming normalization of monetary policy, while avoiding spurious precision about either the timing or the size of the move. The Bank of England has taken important steps toward greater transparency, including the introduction of forward guidance and discussion of key assumptions and alternative scenarios in the Bank’s Inflation Report With policy rates having been so low for so long, and retail spreads having compressed further since the market stresses in 2012, there is a risk that borrowers and lenders could make decisions based on assumptions that monetary conditions will remain accommodative indefinitely. Hence, going forward, the Bank faces the challenge of reducing the risk of potential market surprises, yet without imparting a false sense of certainty about the evolution of interest rates (see Box 1). Further, now that the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) also plays a key role in affecting economic conditions, the Bank faces the additional challenge of explaining the coordination of monetary and macroprudential policies, especially as macroprudential measures will have implications for the pace of economic activity and changes in interest rates will have an impact on prudential risks.