The UK economy has performed well in recent years, but it faces important challenges and risks Economic growth has consistently been near the top among major advanced economies, while the employment rate has risen to a record high. At the same time, economic policies have been broadly in line with past Fund advice: gradual fiscal consolidation has cut the deficit by more than half; monetary policy has remained accommodative, helping to support growth and offset headwinds from fiscal consolidation; financial sector policies have required banks to increase buffers in their balance sheets; and structural reforms have aimed to boost potential output, for example through efforts to ease regulatory impediments to housing construction. Nonetheless, the economy still faces important challenges and risks: productivity growth is still well below pre-crisis rates; the current account deficit widened to a record high in 2015, driven in part by a further decline in the already-low household saving rate; and loan-to-income ratios on new mortgages are again rising. Perhaps most importantly, UK voters face a momentous choice on June 23, 2016, when a referendum will be held on whether the UK should remain in the EU—a choice that is expected to have important economic implications for the UK, the rest of Europe, and the global economy. Against this background, the consultation focused on the following issues How have macroeconomic conditions evolved recently? What is the outlook for the economy? What are the main risks? How can the UK’s economic policies support growth and limit risks, both for the UK and globally? For more detail on the authorities’ response to IMF policy recommendations over the last few years, see Annex 4 of the 2015 UK Article IV report. Key macroeconomic policy changes since the last Article IV consultation include the adjustments to the fiscal path in the March 2016 budget (see subsequent discussion on fiscal policy), which were broadly in line with Fund advice for adjustment to be gradual and calibrated to economic conditions, and the raising of the countercyclical capital buffer in March (see subsequent section on financial sector policies), which was also broadly in line with past Fund advice. Page 10