PROBLEMS Prudential, rather than monetary policy tightening, tools should be the first line of defense against financial risks from the housing market. The objective of policy should be to address systemic financial risks, such as the increasing vulnerabilities of households to income and interest rate shocks, rather than to dampen house price growth per se. The first-best response would be to use more targeted prudential tools, rather than the blunter instrument of interest rate increases. A number of micro-prudential and credit policy measures have already been introduced in an effort to take some of the steam out of the housing market. In particular: In addition to the measures listed here, the authorities are planning to remove the capital gain tax exemption for non-residents disposing of residential property, starting from April 2015. Page 13 Micro-prudential policies have, over the last year, been targeted to strengthen banks’ buffers against their mortgage exposures, both through the application of more stringent mortgage risk weights and higher provisioning for forborne retail mortgages. In November 2013, the Funding for Lending Scheme was refocused towards businesses, with emphasis on SME loans, while household lending is no longer eligible for additional borrowing allowances from the Bank. Following the MMR, underwriting standards for owner-occupier mortgages were tightened in April 2014 to ensure better borrower protection. But in an environment where expectations of capital gains can quickly drive up household indebtedness—and thus systemic risk for financial institutions—macro-prudential policy action is also warranted. Consistent with previous staff advice, the Chancellor has indicated that the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) would be given explicit powers of direction to limit loan-to-income and loan- to-value ratios. The FPC currently has powers of direction to set sectoral capital requirements (including on mortgage exposures) and countercyclical capital buffers for lenders, tools which are more helpful for targeting banks’ health than for addressing household vulnerabilities. In June, the FPC has recommended that the PRA and FCA apply a 15 percent limit, effective October 1, on the proportion of new mortgage loans with loan-to-income at or above 4.5 that any lender can issue. This is a helpful first step toward addressing excessive household indebtedness at the system-wide level, while allowing individual lenders some flexibility to lend to households with low current, but high prospective, incomes, or sizable other assets. The 15 percent limit is presently non-binding for most lenders, is imposed on the flow of new mortgages rather than on the stock, and does not cover certain types of mortgages (e.g. buy-to- let and some remortgages) and lenders (e.g. small lenders). It will therefore be important to monitor carefully the adequacy of the current settings and coverage in coming months. For instance, should housing-related financial risks fail to respond adequately to the measure, tightening limits on the percentage of loans with high income multiple that lenders can grant— by lowering the 15 percent ceiling, having it apply to loans starting at a lower income multiple, and/or broadening coverage to more types of loans or lenders—would be warranted. Should these measures prove insufficient to contain financial risks from the housing market, outright caps on LTIs or LTVs may need to be considered. Raising lenders' sectoral capital requirements would build additional buffers against increased exposures to the housing sector. In parallel, in June the FPC recommended lenders assess mortgage affordability against a 3 percentage point increase in Bank rate over the first five years of the loan. This measure does not appear to be binding at this time as most lenders are already using a similar stress interest rate. Only 11 percent of mortgages issued in 2014Q1 had loan-to-income multiples exceeding 4.5. Page 14 If macroprudential policy—appropriately calibrated and targeted—proves ineffective at alleviating risks to financial stability, interest rate hikes should be considered. There is significant uncertainty around the efficacy of, and lags associated with, macro-prudential measures; even the best designed measures may not achieve the authorities’ objectives in relation to addressing risks from the housing market over a given period of time. Should macroprudential measures appear to be ineffective, policy makers would need to weigh the likely collateral damage to output and employment from a rate hike against the potential costs of an extended period of household or renewed bank weakness. Supply-side measures are crucial to safeguard affordability and mitigate financial risks. Fundamentally, house prices are rising because demand outstrips supply. The UK has secular problem with inadequate housing supply, amplified by a high rate of household formation. The aftermath of the financial crisis, in which housing starts plummeted, has compounded this problem and makes addressing “pent-up” demand all the more difficult. Moreover, in an environment in which trend house price increases are high, surges in house prices can easily be interpreted as signals that even higher prices are yet to come, reinforcing individuals’ perceptions that they must do whatever it takes to get on the housing ladder. In such a situation, macroprudential and monetary policies will only ever be temporary palliatives to an underlying structural problem. New initiatives to spur house building are welcome, but political consensus for further reform is needed. The government has introduced major changes to the planning system (the National Planning Policy framework) to create incentives for local councils to increase available land for housing development, and there are some signs of recovery in housing construction. Nonetheless, key inefficiencies remain. These include unnecessary constraints on brownfield and greenfield developments and tax policies that discourage the most economically-efficient use of property. Help to Buy (HtB) has given lower income households access to mortgage credit, but should regularly be re-assessed. In the aftermath of the crisis, credit for lower income households at higher LTVs shrunk considerably. The aim of the second part of HtB is to enable creditworthy lower-income households to access finance. Data show that guaranteed mortgages so far have, on average, been few (relative to the volume of housing transactions), small in value (relative to national averages), and mostly for properties outside of London and the south east, where price increases have been most dramatic. The program has also played a role in unlocking mortgage credit for lower-income borrowers from other sources. If these alternative flows increase significantly, the FPC and the Treasury may wish to consider whether HtB should be modified or See Macroprudential Policy: Lessons from Advanced Economies, Selected Issues Paper, for an evaluation of macroprudential measures used in other countries. HtB has two components. The first consists of a home-equity loan to finance the purchase of newly-built houses. The second provides a government guarantee for mortgages provided by banks and other lenders. The first part of HtB, the equity loan scheme, provides interest- free loans for 5 year up to 20 percent of the value of a new-build home. The benefit of this part of HtB is that it stimulates housing supply. By April, there were 20,548 new properties purchased with this scheme, where the average price was £205,424. 87 percent of the equity loans were offered to first-time buyers. Page 15 even remains necessary for the full three years of the policy. And as the volume of high-LTV transactions rises, the FPC will need to evaluate if the program is contributing to financial risks.