The economic outlook is expected to moderate amid lower oil prices. Export and revenue losses from lower oil prices will be the most significant transmission channel for the UAE economy. With fiscal consolidation and an appreciating real effective exchange rate, nonhydrocarbon growth is projected to slow to 3½ percent in 2015, before increasing to 4½ percent in the medium term, supported by the implementation of megaprojects and private investment in the run-up to Expo 2020. Growth in hydrocarbon production will likely moderate given the global supply glut. Annual inflation is projected to pick up to 3¾ percent in 2015 due to the level effect, but is expected to decline year-on-year in the coming months supported by moderating rents and lower imported inflation. Over the medium term, inflation should stabilize 200920102011201220132014Credit cycle Change in total credit/GDP ratio (pp. annual)27.3-10.2-14.3-2.90.45.3Growth of total credit/GDP (%, annual)5.82.94.23.17.35.2Total credit-to GDP gap36.518.5-1.7-8.4-6.9-7.2Capital adequacy ratio19.920.720.021.219.318.2Return on asset 1.41.31.52.01.51.7Return on equity 10.910.411.411.511.613.6Net Interest Margin 56.660.864.866.972.475.7Nonperforming loans to total loans Provisions to nonperforming loans 85.089.090.085.194.1102.0Source: Country authorities. Only domestic money banks. It does not include central bank claims. National banks. Specific and general provisions. Bank Financial Soundness Indicators Page 13 around 3 percent. Credit to the private sector is expected to slow to 7.2 percent in 2015 as a result of tighter lending standards and to increase over the medium term as private investment accelerates. Current account surpluses are projected to decline substantially in 2015 due to lower oil prices and will slowly increase with projected gradual recovery in oil prices remaining slightly weaker than the levels consistent with fundamentals. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s view on the outlook. External and domestic conditions pose risks to the medium-term outlook (see Table 1). The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment of risks. External risks. The main external risk is persistently lower oil prices than in the baseline given supply factors and weaker demand. The effects from lower oil prices could be exacerbated by falling liquidity in the banking system, increased volatility in the stock markets, and disruptive declines in the real estate sector. This could lead to asset quality deterioration in UAE banks. Higher interest rates in the US could pose rollover risks and trigger an intensification of liquidity strains on the Dubai government and its GREs with negative effects on domestic banks. By contrast, geopolitical deterioration could raise global energy prices and support the UAE’s external position. A lifting of sanctions on Iran could be beneficial for nonhydrocarbon growth in the UAE (Box 2). Domestic risks. The Dubai megaprojects, if not implemented prudently, may create additional macro-financial risks for Dubai’s GREs, banks, and ultimately the government in light of the debt overhang from the 2008/9 global financial crisis. Dubai’s total government and GRE debt continues to be substantial at around US$143 billion, with about half of it falling due in 2015–20. Page 14 Likelihood/ Expected Impact on Economy if Risk is Realized Policy Responses to Reduce Table 1. United Arab Emirates: Risk Assessment Matrix Nature of Risks Medium to High Persistently low energy prices (Medium) and increased volatility (High) triggered by supply factors reversing only gradually and weaker demand. High Side-effects from global financial conditions: •A surge in financial volatility •Persistent dollar strength Vulnerabilities High Lower oil prices would reduce export earnings and The authorities should resume fiscal consolidation in a gradual fiscal revenues. The $10 drop would reduce fiscal and way –considering large buffers- to external balances by 2⅓ and 2¾ percentage points of reduce fiscal vulnerabilities and GDP, respectively, assuming no policy response. A ensure intergenerational equity permanent $10 drop in oil prices could reduce UAE with limited negative effects on GDP level by 1.5 percentage points after 5 years growth; mitigate Dubai’s macro- assuming that revenue losses are fully offset with financial vulnerabilities by reducing expenditure cuts. contingent liabilities through deleveraging and reforming GREs; continue to diversify the economy; and ensure adequate banking system capitalization and liquidity. Medium Higher US interest rates in the US could trigger The CBU should stand ready to use available liquidity management sustained reversal of capital flows and a sustained tools as needed. A transfer of increase in risk premiums. GREs’ financial problems maturing debt by GREs to could spill over to the domestic banking system. With domestic banks should be a stronger dollar the dirham would appreciate in avoided. Developing the domestic effective terms, leading to lower inflation, but also to debt markets would reduce GRE’s competitiveness loss. reliance on the banking sector and external financing. Medium Imprudent risk-taking and re-leveraging by Dubai Policymakers need to prioritize and sequence major projects; GREs and private companies could prop up short- assess the quality of planned Insufficient domestic term growth at the expense of medium-term stability. spending; contain GRE risk-taking; policy reform to Banks’ balance sheets would be affected. improve their risk management, mitigate the risk of excessive risk taking by GREs reporting, and corporate governance. A slowdown in emerging economies would lead to The authorities should continue enhancing export diversification. lower oil prices, weaken an important driver of Protracted period of nonhydrocarbon goods export growth, and reduce slower growth in tourism and foreign real-estate demand. emerging economies ¹The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows event that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 15 Box 2. The Economic Impact of the Removal of Iran Sanctions The nonhydrocarbon economy in the UAE, particularly in Dubai, stands to benefit from an easing of sanctions on Iran through increased trade and financial flows. If sanctions are lifted, Iran is expected to gradually step up oil production from current levels and bring oil in floating storage to the market. Added supply from Iran poses a modest downside risk for oil prices, but a removal of sanctions is also likely to lead to an expansion of demand from Iran for goods and services from the UAE, a major hub for the region. At US$12 billion, exports to Iran in 2013 accounted for 12 percent of the UAE’s total nonoil exports, making Iran the UAE’s most important export destination after India. Exports to Iran consist largely of re-exported goods that cycle through the UAE’s sophisticated port infrastructure. After growing steadily for several years, exports leveled off and declined with the intensification of sanctions and enforcement efforts since 2010-11. The UAE is well positioned to benefit from an opening of the Iran market by serving as a transshipment point for renewed trade activity. Results from a simulation model suggest that a reversal of sanctions could add 1 percentage point to real GDP growth over 2016-18 through higher nonhydrocarbon exports alone. An agreement would boost demand from Iran for UAE services exports such as trade finance, transportation, tourism, and hospitality. As a proxy for recent business and tourism activity, Dubai hotel guests arriving from Iran have dropped by almost half since 2010. If sanctions are lifted, the additional indirect impact of spending by tourists and business travelers in the broader economy could be significant. ____________________________ The model assumes trade with Iran would gradually return to levels consistent with trends prior to the current sanctions regime. About one-quarter of the gap between trade under the scenario of continued sanctions and the trend is assumed to be permanently lost. Data from the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), the official statistical agency of the UAE, are used but may not be comprehensive. Alternative sources show different estimates for UAE-Iran trade. For example, data from the Dubai Chamber show a larger decline in exports to Iran over 2011-13. The trade loss from sanctions may thus be underestimated in this context. UAE: Trade with Iran (USD bn) Exports Re-exports Share of total non-oil exports (percent) -RHS Source: NationalBureau of Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. H Dubai: Hotel Guests from Iran Hotel guests from Iran (thousands) Share of total hotel guests (RHS) Source: Haver;Dubai Department of Tourism and Commerce Marketing; and IMF staff calculations. Page 16