The relatively benign baseline scenario is subject to a number of important risks Specific risks are elaborated upon in the Risk Assessment Matrix (Annex 2), including risks related to the current account deficit discussed above in the context of the external assessment. Other risks include the following: Globally originating risks Global downturn : The outlook for global growth is uncertain, including because global demand may prove too weak to support solid growth, as discussed in the April 2016 WEO, and global markets remain subject to sudden movements, as seen in early 2016. A downturn in global growth would depress exports; tighter global financial conditions (i.e., higher risk premia and lower asset prices) would further depress GDP growth by weighing also on domestic consumption and investment. Persistently low energy prices : Energy prices could remain persistently low if global supply- demand imbalances last longer than expected. Persistently low energy prices would likely have modest positive net effects on growth, with the boost to consumption from higher household disposable income slightly offsetting negative effects on investment in the energy sector. Headline inflation would remain lower for longer. If this results in second-round deflationary effects, this may require more accommodative monetary policy to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored near the target. UK-specific risks Medium-term productivity growth . As noted above, productivity growth remains well below its pre-crisis rates, and the degree to which it will recover over the medium term is uncertain. A lack of recovery would have a major adverse effect on long-run output and would also put upward pressure on inflation, while a return to pre-crisis rates would result in substantially higher output than projected in staff’s baseline. Real estate market-related risks . House-price growth has risen to more than three times income growth, and loan-to-income ratios on new mortgages are again rising. A continuation of these trends would increase households and banks’ vulnerabilities to house-price, income, and interest-rate shocks (see later section for further details on recent real estate market developments and related macroprudential policies). However, the largest near-term risk relates to the referendum on EU membership . A vote to leave the EU would create uncertainty about the nature of the UK’s long-term economic Page 15 relationship with the EU and the rest of the world. It would also have the potential to crystallize some of the baseline risks noted above. Given the importance of the referendum, staff analyzes some of the possible economic effects of a decision to leave the EU in its accompanying Selected Issue s paper, while recognizing that the choice of whether to remain in the EU is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and noneconomic factors. Key points from staff’s analysis are summarized below. Possible economic effects of an exit from the EU A vote for exit would be followed by a long process with uncertain outcomes Following a decision to exit, the UK would need to negotiate the terms of its withdrawal and a new relationship with the EU—unless it abandoned single market access and relied on WTO rules, which would significantly raise trade barriers. The process governing exit from the EU is untested, and ratification of a new deal could require unanimous support depending on the nature of the agreement, making it subject to considerable political risks. As EU-level agreements also cover the UK’s trading relationship with 60 non-EU economies (and prospective arrangements with another 67 countries are in the works), the UK would also need to simultaneously renegotiate these arrangements, or else see them revert to WTO rules. These processes could last many years, given the wide range of issues and countries involved and given that relatively simple bilateral trade agreements have typically taken 3 or more years to negotiate. The UK could unilaterally determine the date of its exit, but a decision to exit would most likely be irrevocable. Once triggered, Article 50 of the EU Treaty provides for a two-year process for negotiating the terms of the departing state’s withdrawal and its future relations with the EU, but there is no requirement for remaining EU countries to reach agreement with an exiting party. An extension to negotiations could be granted, but would require unanimous consent from other EU governments. A protracted period of uncertainty could weigh on confidence and investment and increase financial market volatility Uncertainty about the outcome of new trade, migration, and regulatory arrangements could discourage investment over the medium term and weigh on consumer sentiment. A change in the UK’s EU membership status could also cause abrupt disruptions to trade and financial flows if new arrangements are not adopted in a timely and smooth manner. An agreement focused solely on trade would need to be approved by the European Parliament and a qualified majority of the European Council. A broader agreement that provided for wider cooperation would need to be agreed by the European Parliament and unanimously by the European Council. Page 16 Another risk is that markets may anticipate significant negative economic effects from an exit and bring them forward via an adverse market reaction in the immediate aftermath of an exit vote. Such a risk scenario could involve some combination of higher borrowing costs for households and individuals due to higher risk premia, downward pressure on equity and house prices, and even a sudden stop of investment inflows into key sectors such as commercial real estate and finance. The UK’s record-high current account deficit and attendant reliance on external financing exacerbates these risks. Such market reactions would adversely affect economic activity, further dampening asset prices in a self-reinforcing cycle that would be only partly offset by expenditure-switching toward net exports in response to abrupt exchange rate depreciation, which could cause inflation to rise above target for some time. Contagion effects could result in spillovers to regional and global markets, though the main effects would be felt domestically. Indeed, such concerns may have already begun to affect UK markets in recent months. For example, in the commercial real estate market, transactions plunged about 40 percent in the first quarter of 2016. Although the residential real estate market remains buoyant, this may reflect temporary effects due to tax changes, as discussed in more detail later in this report. In financial markets, the UK’s nominal effective exchange rate depreciated 9 percent between November 2015 and April 2016, UK sovereign CDS spreads have risen more sharply than the G7 average, and the cost of hedging exchange rate volatility around the time of the referendum has spiked. That said, uncertainty around the market reaction to a Leave vote is wide, as the historical experience with similar events is limited. At the same time, the reaction is expected to be negative and could be severe. The potential steady-state arrangements following an exit fall within a wide range of outcomes One end of the spectrum would entail being outside the EU but remaining in the European Economic Area, as is currently the case for Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Norway. However, such an arrangement would grant the UK little change in sovereignty, as the UK would still have to -6-5-4-3-2-101-6-5-4-3-2-101Jan-06Jul-07Jan-09Jul-10Jan-12Jul-13Jan-15Jul-16 Source: Bloomberg. 1/ Risk reversals measure the skew in the demand for out-of-the-money options at high strikes compared to low strikes. It is defined as the implied volatility for call options minus the implied volatility for put options on the base currency with the same delta. UK: Risk Reversals Show Increased Appetite for Hedging against Sterling Weakness 1/ (GBPUSD 25 delta 3M risk reversal) 250Jan-08Jul-09Jan-11Jul-12Jan-14Jul-15 United Kingdom G7 Average 1/Source: Bloomberg.1/ Excludes Canada due to absence of a functioning CDS market; excludes UK. UK: CDS Spreads Have Risen as Uncertainty Increases (5-year senior CDS) May-16 Page 17 maintain EU regulations governing the free movement of persons, goods, services, and capital, but with greatly reduced influence in determining these regulations. The other end of the spectrum would entail reverting to WTO rules for trade. However, this would significantly curtail access to the EU’s single market and create other non-tariff barriers not covered by WTO rules (such as from no longer being part of the customs union). Between these two extremes is a range of possible outcomes. In general, there would be a trade-off between the UK‘s access to EU markets and the degree to which it could unilaterally set regulatory conditions. The steady-state economic effects of an exit would occur via several channels, including the following Reduced trade and financial flows . An exit is likely to increase barriers to trade and financial flows between the UK and EU, curtailing the benefits from such cooperation and integration, such as those resulting from economies of scale, efficient specialization, and trade-related productivity gains. Such restrictions may also reduce the attractiveness of the UK as an investment destination, including by possibly triggering some activities to relocate elsewhere in the EU. For example, UK financial firms may lose their “passport” to provide financial services to the single market, and much euro-denominated business may eventually move to the continent. Such effects could over time erode London’s status as Europe’s preeminent financial center. (See Appendix II of the accompanying Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) and the Selected Issues paper for further discussion of the potential effects of a vote to leave the EU on the UK’s financial system.) Regulatory changes . Some exit proponents argue that the UK would be able to adopt a more pro-growth regulatory policy once free of EU restrictions. However, as noted above, maintaining substantial access to the EU’s single market may still require alignment of many UK regulations with those of the EU. Moreover, many EU regulations simply implement global agreements and practices (e.g., Basel III financial-sector regulations and global environmental agreements) that would most likely be maintained even after an exit. The UK also already has relatively flexible labor and product market regulations, so the scope for making these regulations more flexible and pro-growth is somewhat limited. Indeed, some of the UK’s most growth-constraining regulations, such as those on housing construction, are already under domestic control. The fact that regulations heavily affected by EU rules are less restrictive than key regulations under domestic control (e.g., restrictions on housing construction) highlights that regulations could actually become more restrictive and less pro-growth after an exit, as domestic special interests may be able to more easily capture regulatory decision-making following an exit. UK banks would retain their passport if the UK were to remain a member of the EEA. In this case, however, the UK would still have to maintain EU regulations governing the free movement of persons, goods, services, and capital, but with greatly reduced influence in determining these regulations, as noted in the previous discussion. Page 18 Fiscal effects . The UK would save its net contributions to the EU budget (around ⅓ percent of UK GDP) if it left the EU. It is unlikely that the UK would save more than this, as the UK budget would likely need to cover some activities currently financed by the EU, such as agricultural support, regional development, and R&D. Moreover, these savings would likely be more than offset by fiscal losses from output declines resulting from reduced trade and investment. Specifically, if steady-state output falls by just 1 percent or more (most estimates are above this—see below), the associated revenue loss would exceed the fiscal savings from not contributing to the EU budget. On balance, the net economic costs of an exit are likely negative and substantial, though there is significant uncertainty about their precise magnitude Quantifying the effects of an exit with much certainty is difficult, including because the outcome will depend in part on the post- exit arrangements, which are unknown. Qualitatively, however, the considerations discussed above suggest that an exit is very likely to adversely affect the UK economy. In line with this assessment, the vast majority of quantitative estimates by various analysts point to sizeable long-run losses, as increased barriers reduce trade, investment, and productivity. The wide range of estimated losses does not represent fundamental disagreement among most experts that exit would be costly, but largely reflects differing assumptions about the UK’s future economic relationships with the EU and the rest of the world. Several studies examine the likely short- and medium-term effects and find that they would also likely be negative. These include illustrative scenarios by IMF staff in the accompanying Selected Issues paper in which the level of output is 1½ percent below the baseline at its peak deviation in 2019 in a scenario of limited uncertainty effects and 5½ percent below the baseline in a more adverse scenario. Comparison of Short-Run Effects on GDP (Deviation from baseline, percent of GDP) Sources: See accompanying Selected Issues paper for paper references.Notes: All values for 2018, except HMG scenarios, which are for fiscal year 2017/18. Sources: See accompanying Selected Issues paper for references.Notes: bars denote ranges. Diamonds denote midpoints or point estimates. Comparison of Long-Run Effects on GDP (Deviation from baseline, percent of GDP) Page 19 An exit would also have important spillovers . Though the UK would be most affected by an exit, other EU economies would similarly experience reduced gains from trade, less efficient matching of capital and labor, and heightened uncertainty during the transition, to varying degrees depending on existing linkages with the UK. Losses from reduced trade and economic integration may rise further if a UK exit increases support for higher barriers elsewhere in Europe. Any effects on the UK financial sector and financial markets may also have outward spillovers to Europe and beyond, given the importance of London as a global financial center. For further discussion of spillovers and other issues related to the referendum, see the accompanying Selected Issues paper. On the other hand, a Remain vote could strengthen the outlook . As noted above, staff’s baseline scenario assumes that referendum-related uncertainty effects dissipate and that effects on financial markets in the run-up to the referendum reverse following a Remain vote, helping to support a rebound in growth in late 2016. Over time, effects could be stronger than assumed in staff’s baseline, posing an upside risk, as enhanced institutional stability could foster stronger growth. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s baseline outlook and list of key risks . In March 2016, the independent Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) revised down its 2016 growth projection from 2.5 percent to 2.0 percent, in part due to a softer global outlook. The OBR also revised down medium-term potential and actual growth by about ¼ percentage point due to continued weak productivity growth. The OBR’s projections are now very close to those of IMF staff, the BoE, and consensus forecasts. Staff’s external assessment was viewed as reasonable. On the referendum, the authorities agreed that this posed the largest near-term uncertainty for the outlook. HM Treasury published its estimates of the long-term effects of an exit from the EU in April 2016, while the BoE discussed how EU membership affects the BoE’s ability to achieve monetary and financial stability in a report in October 2015 and discussed possible short-term implications of a vote to leave for monetary policy in its May 2016 Inflation Report Consensus forecast (May 2016)1.92.0… OBR November 2015 Autumn Statement2.52.3-0.4 March 2016 Budget2.02.1-0.2May 2016 Inflation Report (BoE)2.0……Staff projection1.92.1-0.2 Sources: OBR; IMF staff projections.Growth 2016 Output Gap UK: Growth and Output Gap Projections Page 20