The new regulatory architecture is settling in. The new structure of the FPC, the PRA and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has functioned relatively smoothly over the last year, and is helping to deliver a more resilient financial system. Looking ahead, maintaining strong coordination across bodies (on microprudential and macroprudential matters) and ensuring coherent communication will be vital to avoid uncertainty, such as of the kind faced by banks around the 2013 Asset Quality Review, or by insurers earlier this year. Separately, given the Bank of England’s expanded mandate and potential for future changing demands, it would be important to maintain and further develop effective internal and external oversight arrangements. Reforms to the Bank of England’s Sterling Monetary Framework will provide a further buffer against shocks. The recently strengthened liquidity backstops should help solvent UK banks ride out temporary funding stresses, which otherwise carry the potential for disruptive domestic and outward credit spillovers. However, easier access to the backstops could increase banks’ appetite for risk-taking, unless supervision is commensurately strengthened. This consideration should also guide the implementation of the authorities’ recent decision to offer backstops to major broker- dealers and central counterparties. Separately, there may be a need to ensure that the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) does not inhibit the Bank’s ability to extend emergency liquidity support. A companion Selected Issues Paper on outward financial spillovers from the UK finds that a sharp worldwide interest rate increase (or “snapback”) could place leveraged global shadow banks under pressure, opening the possibility of contagion to the G-14 dealer banks sitting at the center of world repo markets, and leading, eventually, to external deleveraging by those banks and, hence, adverse outward credit spillovers. The Bank’s lean capital position effectively requires that it be indemnified by the government against any losses on its emergency liquidity assistance to illiquid, but solvent institutions, which is a form of State Aid. However, under the recently-enacted EU BRRD it could be interpreted that State Aid would trigger mandatory write down or conversion of certain capital instruments, which could prove counterproductive to stabilization efforts. If the Bank were not indemnified, this could result in negative Bank equity should losses materialize; this would argue for an ex ante increase in the level of Bank capital. Page 21 Measures to address the problem of Too-Important-To-Fail institutions are advancing, but are not yet complete. The ring-fencing of banks’ retail operations, new bail-in and other resolution powers for the Bank of England, and the development of resolution strategies and plans for systemically important banks all constitute important reforms. As the authorities have acknowledged, completing the task requires a clear strategy for systemic entities outside the ring fence and maintaining positive momentum on cross-border cooperation on resolution of global banks (including international agreement on gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity). This agenda must be implemented in a way that ensures international consistency of national reforms, and guards against regulatory arbitrage. In particular, it will be important to ensure that excessive penalization and/or reduced profitability of certain activities (such as investment banking) does not stifle market making or result in a migration of risks elsewhere (such as to non-bank financial institutions). The authorities are adopting a more determined approach to tackling rogue banking practices. A new legal regime to hold senior bank managers more directly accountable for misconduct is being extended to all UK-resident banks and, subject to consultation, branches of foreign banks. A “Fair and Effective Markets Review” has been launched with a view to: strengthen the governing principles and oversight tools for already-regulated wholesale fixed income, commodity and currency markets; assess the case for extending the regulatory perimeter for unregulated wholesale markets (such as FX and precious metals) where international coordination may be required; and subject additional benchmarks (other than LIBOR) to recent UK legislation providing for, inter alia, criminal sanctions for market manipulation. These measures should help to reform banking culture, ensure the integrity of financial markets, and strengthen confidence in the UK’s financial center as a global public good. Ongoing efforts to enhance entity transparency and address tax evasion are welcome. Following-up on its G8 presidency objectives, the UK aims to fight tax evasion including by improving transparency of companies’ and trusts’ ownership, both in the UK and in British overseas territories (BoTs) and Crown dependencies (CDs), and by mobilizing the anti-money laundering (AML) framework. The consultation process has concluded and primary legislation is expected to be introduced in Parliament soon. Depending on the extent to which the international standards are reflected in the new legislation, its implementation may necessitate economic adjustments, particularly in BoTs and CDs. This could also generate spillovers on other financial centers as a consequence of the transmission of UK regulation through global banks located in the UK. In this regard, the UK authorities indicated that they do not play any role in ensuring corporate transparency or in enforcing legislation on tax crimes in the BoTs and CDs.