The current account deficit has risen substantially in recent years, reaching 5.1 percent of GDP in 2014 (Table 6) . The increase has been due almost entirely to a weaker income balance. Part of this decline could reflect structural factors, such as the UK’s increasingly favorable corporate tax rates attracting more inward FDI, thereby reducing the stock of net FDI and in turn the income derived from it (see the companion paper). However, part of the decline in the income balance may also be temporary, reflecting factors such as unusually low returns on British investments abroad, possibly due to relatively subdued growth in major investment destinations such as continental Europe. Indeed, as the growth differential between the UK and other advanced Aged 16 to 64 Aged 65 and Over (rhs) UK: Employment Rate (Percent, SA) Source: Haver. Page 12 economies has narrowed over the last year, the current account deficit has started to decline, reaching 4.2 percent of GDP (sa) in the first three quarters of 2015 due to an improving income balance. However, the current account was wider than justified by fundamentals in 2015, and sterling appeared overvalued . For the full-year 2015, the current account is projected to be - 4.1 percent of GDP. Adjusting for cyclical factors and temporary effects on the income balance yields an underlying cyclically adjusted balance of -2.8 percent of GDP (see Annex 1 and the companion paper). This compares to a current account norm of -0.3 percent of GDP, as estimated by the EBA model, implying a current account gap of -2.5 percent of GDP and sterling overvaluation of 11 percent. The EBA REER models provide a similar assessment, estimating overvaluation of 10–12 percent. Adding uncertainty around these estimates yields an estimated current account gap of -1.5 to -3.5 percent of GDP and REER overvaluation of 5–15 percent in 2015. Most of the estimated current account gap (1.3 percentage points) reflects the fiscal balance currently being looser than its optimal medium-term level. Several factors mitigate risks associated with the high current account deficit . First, financing of the deficit has shifted to somewhat more stable sources, such as FDI. Second, even if exchange rate overvaluation does unwind rapidly, the BoE’s well-established inflation-targeting framework should allow it to largely look-through the one-off effects on inflation, as the BoE did during 2010–12, thereby avoiding pro-cyclical tightening. Third, the currency composition of the NIIP helps act as an automatic stabilizer, as foreign assets have a higher foreign- currency component than do foreign liabilities, such that sterling depreciation automatically improves the NIIP and income flows via valuation effects. That said, a smaller deficit would be preferable . A large deficit may indicate underlying imbalances, such as sub-optimally low public and private saving. More generally, the sheer size of the deficit—the largest among advanced economies in 2014—and its general usefulness as an early warning indicator suggests that the deficit should not be ignored completely. For example, although recent financing has been more stable, events could change market sentiment and trigger a shift in the composition and size of financial flows. Abrupt outflows could adversely affect domestic investment, with negative outward spillovers via cross-border J EE X W H UK: Current Account Balance, 2014 (Percent of GDP)Source: WEO. ApproachOvervaluation (percent) Adjusted Current Account Regression 1/11REER models11REER Index Regression12REER Level Regression10Average11Source: IMF staff calculation.1/ Adjusted for cyclical factors. Uses an elasticity of -0.23. UK: Estimated Exchange Rate Overvaluation under Different EBA Approaches Page 13 linkages with foreign investors. An accumulation of substantial external imbalances would thus be best avoided, and policies that assist external adjustment could be helpful.