The UK has been undertaking an ambitious fiscal consolidation program (Figure 3) Following the crisis, the UK’s public finances deteriorated sharply, with the overall deficit widening to 11 percent of GDP in FY2009/10. In response, the government announced a package of fiscal consolidation measures that have helped reduce the overall deficit to 5¾ percent of GDP by the end of FY2013/14. The government remains fully committed to fiscal consolidation, with the aim of bringing the overall balance to a small surplus by FY2018/19. After rapid tightening at the outset, the pace of discretionary tightening has moderated, relative to that in FY2011/12–FY2012/13, with total discretionary measures falling to ¾ percentage points of GDP in FY2013/14. Meanwhile, automatic stabilizers have been allowed to operate fully in response to slower-than-expected growth, while the government has also reoriented expenditures from current to capital to support longer-term growth. Fiscal tightening planned for FY2014/15 is appropriate. The 2014 Budget shows a reduction in the overall deficit to 4¾ percent of GDP in FY2014/15 from 5¾ percent in FY2013/14. This implies a ½ percentage point change in the cyclically-adjusted primary balance, further strengthening the public finances without creating an undue drag on growth. As part of the macro-prudential measures announced on June 26, mortgages with LTIs above 4.5 will no longer be covered by the mortgage guarantee leg of the scheme. Total revenues are projected at 37¾ percent of GDP, unchanged from FY2013/14. Revenue losses—owing mainly to a reduction in the corporate tax rate from 23 to 21 percent, the temporary cut in the business rate, and the personal allowance increases—are budgeted to be fully offset by increases in corporate profits and earnings. Total expenditure is projected to fall by 1 percentage point to 42½ percent of GDP in FY2014/15, reflecting a cut in current spending and a small increase in investment. FY10FY11FY12FY13FY14FY15 Change in CAPB (staff est.) Discretionary measures 1/ Sources: HM Treasury; and IMF staff projections.1/ Calculated as an annual change in "Total Discretionary Consolidation" presented in "Total Consolidation Plans over the Parliament" in the authorities' budget documents. Projection Fiscal Stance 9095FY12FY13FY14FY15FY16FY17FY18FY19 Net debt (baseline) Net debt (no change in primary balance) Projection Public Sector Debt (Percent of centered GDP) 1/ Sources: Office for National Statistics; and IMF staff projections.1/ GDP centered on end-March. Page 16 There is a clear need to put debt on a downward path to ensure long term fiscal sustainability. Despite the significant consolidation over the past few years and faster output growth, public debt dynamics are yet to stabilize. Public sector net debt is projected to increase to about 80 percent by FY2015/16, due to still-large primary deficits and rising interest costs. In this context, the government’s objective of eliminating the overall deficit by FY2018/19, implying some 6 percentage point of GDP reduction in the overall deficit over the next five years, is appropriate. But the overall consolidation plan implies difficult choices. Because national elections are scheduled for May 2015, fiscal plans are specified only through FY2015/16. However, achieving the required medium-term deficit reduction only through spending measures would likely require some combination of cuts to previously prioritized areas (such as health and education), further reductions in the budgets of departments that have already faced significant cutbacks, or cuts in social security spending. A wider range of options— including both revenue and expenditure items—should be explored to meet the medium-term fiscal objectives. Consolidation efforts should also carefully consider issues of equity and efficiency. Efforts to enhance efficiency have already lowered spending. In searching for further efficiency gains, the government should prioritize the delivery of quality health and education services, as well as infrastructure to help bolster the productive capacity of the economy. Means testing for social benefits could be used more widely, to reduce spending while ensuring that basic needs continue to be met. Entitlement reforms could both yield budgetary savings and improve labor supply incentives. Revenue measures could include reducing tax expenditures (such as VAT zero-ratings, which amount to some 2½ percent of GDP annually) and greater reliance on Pigouvian taxes (including those on carbon and congestion). Property taxation could be reformed, to stimulate housing supply, improve housing allocation, and boost revenues. This could include appropriately updating valuations for taxable property. Recent efforts by the government to analyze and document the distributional impact of the consolidation are welcome. In developing and implementing its medium-term plans, the government should continue to undertake and publicize this type of analysis to allow for an informed public discussion. The planned review of the fiscal framework is opportune. Fiscal policy is currently framed by two objectives: (i) balancing the structural current budget by the end of a rolling 5-year period; and (ii) putting the net debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward path by FY2015/16. The first of these objectives is expected to be met within a few years, and the latter will be redundant soon. Hence, a new framework will be needed. The new framework should have clearly defined operating targets that can be directly controlled by policymakers and are closely linked to debt and its sustainability (such as overall deficits), while allowing for flexibility to deal with unexpected shocks. See also the Debt Sustainability Analysis in Annex 2. Page 17 Formalization of the Spending Review process could help reduce uncertainty about the medium- term expenditure framework.