Fiscal vulnerability has increased and the fiscal position, if it remains at today’s level, will not be consistent with intergenerational equity. The fiscal break-even oil price is projected at $72 a barrel in 2015, above the $62 Brent oil price projection. A PIH-based calculation suggests that the current nonhydrocarbon primary deficit exceeds the level consistent with a constant real per capita annuity that would ensure that future generations benefit as much from the exhaustible oil wealth as the current generation (Annex I). The desirable macroeconomic policy mix in the coming years entails fiscal consolidation, while maintaining the peg and easing liquidity management if needed. With persistently lower oil prices, gradual fiscal consolidation is important to strengthen long-term fiscal sustainability. The authorities plan consolidation of 2.8 percent of nonoil GDP in 2015, and under their planned consolidation path, the fiscal position will adjust by a total of 13½ percent of nonoil GDP and be broadly in line with intergenerational equity by 2020. fiscal break-even oil price would already decline to levels below the projected oil price in 2016. Staff supported the plan to consolidate, but recommended a more gradual pace to cushion the impact on nonhydrocarbon GDP growth, which could be about 1 percentage point annually. The authorities nonetheless preferred a faster pace of consolidation (realistically implementable in staff’s view) to minimize tapping their sovereign wealth fund assets. The authorities noted that their oil price projections in the medium term are lower than staff’s. Since the path of oil prices over the medium term is uncertain, staff recommended developing contingency plans (Annex II discusses the fiscal risks). In the event of an additional drop in the price of oil, the authorities should use existing fiscal space to absorb the initial shock while consolidating over the medium term. If beyond the forecast period, consolidation continues in the same pace as envisaged for 2020 under the authorities’ plans, the fiscal stance would be fully consistent with intergenerational equity by 2022. The baseline scenario outlined in Tables 2–5 and the Annexes are based on the authorities’ planned adjustment. Under the more gradual consolidation path that staff recommended, the fiscal stance would be in line with intergenerational equity in 10–12 years, with a milder impact on nonhydrocarbon GDP growth of 0.5 percentage point annually. Page 17 Fiscal consolidation will require rationalization of spending, while mobilization of nonhydrocarbon revenues should also be considered. On the expenditure side, staff recommended the following measures: (i) controlling public wage bill growth (stabilizing the size per capita and limiting wage increases to correspond to productivity gains); (ii) continue reducing energy and water subsidies and other transfers, while protecting those in need; (iii) lowering capital transfers to Abu Dhabi GREs; and (iv) stabilizing other expenses in real terms. The authorities noted that their consolidation package consists of similar measures but emphasized that they plan a larger slowdown in capital and other transfers. Going forward, the authorities should consider raising nonhydrocarbon revenues by introducing a VAT, in coordination with the GCC countries, and broadening corporate income and excise taxes. authorities indicated that discussions are ongoing in the GCC to introduce VAT, but the timeline is unclear. As regards to income tax reforms, the authorities noted that an impact study would be needed before any broadening of the corporate income tax. Government investment should be protected, while GREs should further prioritize planned projects to avoid increasing fiscal vulnerabilities. Staff and the authorities agreed that government-funded investment should be preserved relative to nonhydrocarbon GDP to continue supporting infrastructure needed for maintaining the country’s competitiveness. With upcoming megaprojects planned and executed mostly by GREs, staff recommended gradual implementation of these projects, in line with the expected demand and considering contingent liabilities, which will require close oversight and continued strengthening of debt management frameworks in the different Emirates. Care should also be taken to prevent GRE activities from crowding out private sector activity. Continued improvements in the availability of information on GRE debt are crucial. The authorities agreed that GRE projects should be prioritized. They noted that nonessential GRE projects in Abu Dhabi have been slowed down. In Dubai, GRE projects will continue to be implemented at a measured pace, in line with aggregate demand. Abu Dhabi increased water and electricity tariffs by 170 percent and 40 percent, respectively, in January 2015. With lower oil prices, implicit subsidies on petroleum products are estimated to have almost disappeared. Implicit subsidies on natural gas are still high. The macro-economic framework, presented in Tables 2–5, reflects only spending side measures. Expenditures CommentsIMF staffAuthorities Total 9.013.4Water and electricity subsidies1.11.1Removal of water and electricity subsidiesOther transfers1.13.1Slowing growth in other transfersCapital transfers 3.55.8Lowering capital transfers to Abu Dhabi GREs Containing growth in other expense3.33.3Stabilizing other expense in real terms Revenues Total CITApplying the CIT of 10 percent (to UAE, GCC, and foreign companies)VATIntroducing a 5 percent VATExcise taxIntroducing a 15 percent excise tax on automobilesSource: IMF staff estimates.1/ In percent of non-hydrocarbon GDP. Illustrative Menu of Options for Fiscal Adjustment Estimated gains in 2015-20 1/IMF staff-proposed revenue optionsEstimated gains once fully implemented 1/ Page 18 The so-called Master Plan for Expo 2020, which will guide Expo-related activities (including investment spending) before and after the event, will be approved by end-2015. The longstanding exchange rate peg has served the UAE well and should be maintained. The peg has anchored prices of tradables and thus inflation, and provided stability to income flows and financial wealth in periods of both high and low oil prices. Therefore, given the large external buffers, maintaining the peg is appropriate. However, adjustment through fiscal consolidation is necessary to maintain the UAE’s external position at the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals (Annex III). The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment. Going forward, the authorities should proceed with reforms aimed at strengthening liquidity management, deepening money and capital markets, and reducing foreign exchange exposure of banks and corporations, so that over the medium term policy frameworks may evolve as needed to continue to effectively manage demand and inflation pressures. The authorities are committed to the exchange rate peg and agreed to the reforms aimed at strengthening policy frameworks over the medium term. Liquidity management should remain supportive of credit growth. Staff recommended that the Central Bank should stand ready to use its liquidity management tools, as needed, to support credit growth in an adverse scenario with deposit decline. In the meantime, deficit financing should avoid full reliance on drawing down government deposits and instead tap sovereign wealth funds or capital markets. While the authorities broadly agreed, their focus will be on maintaining healthy liquidity. A strong macro-fiscal framework on a consolidated basis needs to be developed, building on past progress and existing strengths. Progress has been achieved in strengthening intergovernmental fiscal coordination. The Fiscal Policy Coordination Council now prepares consolidated backward-looking fiscal data for the UAE. Building on the expertise accumulated at the federal level, the authorities should now develop a consolidated forward-looking medium-term fiscal framework to help set more clearly the direction for fiscal policy for the UAE as a whole. The federal Ministry of Finance and the Dubai Department of Finance have strengthened budget processes and have medium-term fiscal frameworks in place. The Abu Dhabi and Dubai Departments of Finance have started introducing performance budgeting in a few pilot sectors. Strengthening Abu Dhabi’s annual budget processes remains a priority: strong Public Finance Management systems will need to be in place to keep spending in check (firm expenditure controls, timely fiscal reporting based on international standards; see accompanying Selected Issues Paper ). The authorities indicated that the Abu Dhabi medium-term budget framework, prepared under the Staff estimates using two alternative models suggest that current account balances in 2015 and the medium term are lower than the levels consistent with fundamentals (Annex III). The projected current account balance is slightly below the norm implied by the external sustainability approach—pointing to the need to generate more savings to support future generations once hydrocarbon resources are exhausted, consistent with fiscal consolidation. The macro-balance approach also indicates that the projected current account balance in 2015 is lower than the equilibrium level implied by a range of structural and policy variables. External buffers in the form of international reserves and sovereign wealth fund assets are ample. Page 19 Abu Dhabi Comprehensive Financial Plan (ADCFP) has been submitted to the Executive Council of Abu Dhabi for approval. Staff welcomed this step and urged the authorities to approve and operationalize the ADCFP swiftly, while integrating it fully in the annual budget process.