Continuing on a path of fiscal consolidation in 2014 is adequate. The combined federal and emirate budgets imply further fiscal consolidation this year. Staff agreed that continued fiscal consolidation is appropriate, because it would undo earlier stimulus that is no longer needed as the economic cycle strengthens and private credit growth picks up. It would also help reduce fiscal vulnerabilities (indicated by an increased breakeven oil price) and bring the fiscal stance closer to levels needed to bequeath future generations an equitable share of resources (Box 3). The federal budget is balanced and Dubai, appropriately, plans to continue gradual consolidation that will help further reduce its debt-related vulnerabilities. Abu Dhabi’s budget implies a large fiscal tightening (estimated at nearly 6 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP), including reductions in security, defense, and other current expenditures. Because budget amendments in Abu Dhabi in the course of the year are likely to result in higher spending than initially budgeted, staff projected a more moderate consolidation for 2014, which it felt would be appropriate under current cyclical circumstances. It recommended a cautious approach to midyear budget amendments, particularly if aggregate demand strengthens further. Dubai’s government debt sustainability has improved . Dubai’s government debt (including extrabudgetary obligations) is expected to decline to 56 percent of Dubai GDP this year. Although Dubai’s debt could still become unsustainable under severe shocks, the outlook has improved: continued fiscal consolidation and improving growth prospects have been strengthening Dubai’s resilience to external shocks (Appendix 1). Overall UAE gross government debt (15 percent of GDP) is manageable, also considering the UAE’s large net foreign asset position. Medium-term fiscal plans are appropriate, though not sufficiently binding to guide fiscal policy . The federal government plans a balanced budget until 2016, and Dubai targets continued gradual consolidation. Abu Dhabi’s informal medium-term fiscal framework also aims at consolidation, though the framework guides fiscal policy in the emirate only loosely. Staff recommended rebalancing the composition of expenditure. For example, reducing energy and water subsidies, while protecting those in need, would create fiscal space and improve energy efficiency. In addition, limiting further increases in the wage bill would help maintain budgetary flexibility and make private sector employment more attractive to nationals. The authorities are further strengthening intergovernmental fiscal coordination. Spending is dominated by Abu Dhabi, with the federal government responsible for a smaller share of spending than in any other country. Each emirate has full autonomy over its fiscal policies, but the Fiscal Policy Coordination Council, supported by the Ministry of Finance, now prepares consolidated Page 11 backward-looking fiscal data for the UAE as a whole. Work on fiscal coordination is supported by a self-financed program of IMF technical assistance. Individual governments are also reforming their budgets. The federal government has introduced a three-year budget cycle with a thorough evaluation of costs between cycles. Spending ceilings are set top-down and spending is presented on a program basis with associated performance indicators. Dubai has a medium-term fiscal framework setting budget targets through 2017, though targets are not published. Abu Dhabi produces a report on the medium-term fiscal outlook and has started work on performance-based budgeting. Staff recommended that Abu Dhabi strengthen its annual budget process, to avoid frequent mid-year budget amendments, and to adopt a formal medium-term fiscal framework to set more clearly the direction for fiscal policy for the emirate and the UAE as a whole. Improvements in budgeting could also further increase the efficiency of public spending (Box 4). The longstanding exchange rate peg has served the UAE well. As a commodity-based open economy with open labor markets, the UAE would benefit little from expenditure switching under flexible rates. Staff estimates of the three alternative CGER-type models produce widely- dispersed exchange rate assessments (Appendix II). The projected current account balance is close to the norm implied by the macro-balance approach, but is significantly below the level implied by the external sustainability approach—pointing to the need to generate more savings and consistent with fiscal consolidation. By contrast, the equilibrium exchange rate approach points to moderate undervaluation. While short-term capital flows, such as through bond funds, have been more vulnerable to the change in US monetary policy since mid-2013, external buffers in the form of international reserves and sovereign wealth fund assets are ample, and higher interest rates have not prevented rises in stock and real estate prices. Higher interest rates as a result of a normalization of U.S. monetary policy, unless disruptive, would help the UAE mitigate the risk of potentially large private credit growth. The recent pickup in private credit growth amid ample liquidity in the banking system warrants close monitoring. Staff and the authorities agreed that should credit growth accelerate significantly, tightening macroprudential regulations, such as the advances-to-stable-resources ratio, capital adequacy ratio, risk weights for lending, or reserve requirements on time deposits, could be appropriate to prevent excessive risk-taking and support the macroeconomic policy mix.