Strong growth and low inflation are expected to persist. Real GDP is projected to expand by 3.2 percent in 2014 and 2.7 percent in 2015, before growth gradually returns to trend rates. Business investment is expected to be strong, given the sharp decline in uncertainty about the prospects for final demand, relatively healthy corporate balance sheets, and improvements in domestic credit and financial market conditions. The projections also assume a slow recovery in labor productivity growth to average levels, which would support household incomes and allow inflation to remain close to the target. The output gap is expected to close gradually, enabling unemployment to reach its natural rate of 5.5 percent by 2019. Important political events are on the horizon. A UK general election is scheduled for May 7, 2015. On September 18, 2014, voters in Scotland will be asked, “Should Scotland be an independent country?” In the event of a “yes” vote, a newly-independent Scotland would face a number of international economic issues, including about the allocation of assets and liabilities currently held by the UK, the exchange rate regime, the financial regulatory and supervisory framework, and membership of international institutions such as the IMF. Uncertainty about productivity implies upside and downside risks. Accelerating productivity growth would spur investment and output even further. However, if productivity continues to be flat, the recovery will eventually stall as remaining spare capacity is exhausted. Alternatively, if earnings claims increase ahead of productivity, then inflation risks will accelerate. The housing market creates domestic risks. So far, there are few of the typical signs of a credit-led bubble in the housing market: net credit growth is modest, transaction “churn” is relatively low, and households are not drawing on housing equity to finance consumption. Nonetheless, a steady increase in high loan-to-income mortgages implies that households are gradually becoming more vulnerable to falls in income and interest rate shocks. The UK’s Prospects for Strong Growth: The Role of Business Investment, Selected Issues Paper. The BoE estimates that a hike in interest rates of 2.5 percentage points would increase the average mortgage repayment (principal plus interest rate payments) from 21 to 28 percent of gross disposable income. The effect is relatively large since many mortgagors have fixed-rate contracts that last two to three years (Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , 2013Q4). Nominal Effective Exchange Rate, CPI Real Effective Exchange Rate, CPI Effective Exchange Rates (Index, 2010 = 100)Source: IMF's Information Notice System. Trade Income Transfers CAB Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP)Source: Haver/ONS. Page 9 External risks are tilted to the downside. The global economy could see further disruptions arising from the withdrawal of unconventional monetary policies in the US, a sharp slowdown of growth in the euro area and across key emerging economies, and increases in geopolitical tensions. The presence of two globally-systemic UK banks (HSBC and Standard Chartered) with large exposures to China and Asia also implies potential financial stability risks from a sharp China slowdown. Although the UK’s direct exposure to these risks through trade and financial channels is in some cases small, the realization of any one of them, in concert with a re- pricing of risk from the current unusually low levels, could depress asset prices and damage confidence.