The floating exchange rate should remain the main absorber of external shocks Exchange rate intervention should not substitute for strong macroeconomic policies. There is scope, however, to respond to external shocks by reducing reserves towards prudential norms if macroeconomic policy settings are at appropriate levels and the exchange rate is not deemed stronger than warranted by fundamentals. Staff considers the FX intervention in September–October 2014 to have been justified by exchange rate depreciation pressures emanating from the volatile external environment (particularly in the immediate region) in the context of a disinflationary monetary policy stance, an effective real exchange rate very close to equilibrium, and international reserves well-above prudential norms. There is limited scope to respond to adverse spillovers with countercyclical macroeconomic policies . With inflation above the target range and a structural primary fiscal balance that is lower than the level that would stabilize the public debt-to-GDP ratio, there is limited room for active monetary or fiscal policy easing to combat adverse spillovers. Automatic fiscal stabilizers built into Uruguay’s solid social safety net and tax system would help shelter the economy from adverse developments. Nevertheless, the strong liquidity buffers of the public sector and the banking system would enable an orderly adjustment to shocks Public sector financing risks are limited in the near term as the central government has access to 3½ percent of GDP in contingent credit lines and has a stock of liquid financial assets sufficient to cover public debt service through end-2015 (4½ percent of GDP). Central bank reserves Since 2010 the limit is fixed in inflation-indexed units. In 2013, it corresponded to about 1¼ percentage points of GDP. Dec-13Mar-14Jun-14Sep-14Dec-142021222324 Net Sales Exchange Rate (UY peso/US$, rhs) Exchange Rate and Net Volume of FX Sales by the Central Bank (In millions of US$)Sources: Banco Central del Uruguay and Fund staff calculations. Page 21 stood around 32 percent of GDP in October 2014, whereas ‘liquid’ reserves (excluding required reserves against FX deposits) amounted to 18½ percent of GDP, comfortably exceeding prudential benchmarks (Annex I). The high share of private nonresident holdings of Uruguay’s public debt, however, could make domestic financial conditions susceptible to changes in global financial sentiment. The modestly sized and highly liquid banking system is unlikely to act as a major amplifier of shocks. Nevertheless, there is a need to continue monitoring closely the resilience of banks and their customers. FX- denominated bank credit to borrowers in the nontradables sector, around one third of total loans to the private sector or 7 percent of GDP, could be a point of vulnerability (Table 1, paragraph 24–27). Macroprudential policy settings could be eased in case of liquidity strains. The reserve requirement on nonresident holdings of central bank paper could be unwound if there were disruptive portfolio outflows, and in case of liquidity stress in the local banking system, reserve requirements on bank deposits could be lowered. Authorities’ views . The authorities argued that with international reserves significantly above traditional prudential benchmarks and money growth in line with the BCU’s reference range, occasional FX intervention is appropriate for smoothing potential excessive volatility in the exchange rate. They also argued that foreign currency sales entailed lower fiscal costs than issuing central bank securities to withdraw peso liquidity.