The sharp decline in oil prices will start having a significant effect on Uruguay’s economy in 2015 The drop in global crude oil prices is expected to lower Uruguay’s oil import bill by almost 1½ percentage points of GDP in 2015, and to reduce the current account deficit despite the projected slowdown in export earnings. However, the pass through of lower crude oil prices to end-user prices is expected to be gradual, as part of the windfall will initially be absorbed by the state-owned petroleum company to shore up its operating balance. The deceleration in activity is expected to continue in the near term GDP growth is projected to soften to around 2¾ percent in 2015. The programmed slowdown in fiscal spending and continued weak external conditions—including lower export prices for soy and grains—are projected to outweigh the positive impact of lower gasoline prices on private consumption and the ramping up of exports by the recently completed Montes del Plata pulp mill. In the medium term, growth is projected to return to the potential rate of 3– 3½ percent as external demand growth recovers and private investment growth picks up The downward revision to medium-term growth—from the 4 percent projected one year ago—reflects significant downward revisions to growth prospects in key trading partners. CPI inflation is projected to decline gradually to within the target range as monetary policy remains tight, the output gap closes, and lower oil prices are gradually passed through to retail prices. Net public debt is projected to crawl up to 43 percent of GDP by 2019 from 36½ percent in 2013 with the primary balance remaining below the debt-stabilizing level. There are risks stemming from external and domestic factors (detailed in the RAM). The immediate region Uruguay’s economic linkages with the immediate region have lessened in some respects but remain relevant (Annex II). Subpar performance in Argentina and Brazil has already lowered Uruguay’s growth, and poses further near- and medium-term risks. The global economy Being a small and open economy that mostly exports agricultural commodities, imports all its oil, and has nonresidents holding a high share of its public debt, Uruguay would not be immune to further changes in global commodity prices or global financial conditions. The Montes del Plata pulp mill started production in June 2014. Its exports are estimated at US$300 million in 2014 and are expected to increase to US$700 million in 2015 (close to 1½ percent of GDP). A one percentage point drop in Argentina’s GDP growth is estimated to reduce Uruguay’s GDP growth by slightly more than ½ percentage point; the impact could be lower now given diminished economic linkages. Growth shocks in Brazil have typically had a muted effect on Uruguay. See Annex I in the 2013 Article IV Staff Report, “Is the Uruguayan Economy Decoupling from its Neighbors? An Analysis of Inwards Spillovers to Uruguay”. See Selected Issues Paper “How is the Normalization of U.S. Monetary Policy Likely to Affect Uruguay?” by Diva Singh and Yulia Ustyugova. Page 14 Domestic fiscal outlook A delay in tightening fiscal policy beyond 2015 would leave net debt on an upward trend and raise the possibility of a more austere procyclical adjustment later. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s outlook but saw more limited downside risks . They felt that the decoupling of Uruguay’s economic performance from economic developments in Argentina and Brazil has been self evident in recent years, and that the reduced trade and tourism linkages especially with Argentina would imply lower negative spillovers than in the past. They stressed that a slowdown in China would hurt Uruguay less than other regional commodity exporters as agricultural commodity prices would be unlikely to fall as much as those for oil or metals. Finally, they emphasized that the public sector’s strong liquidity buffers and the flexible exchange rate would help buffer Uruguay’s economy against adverse shocks. C pp r Z i n c N i c k l O il ( B r n t ) G a s S y B ee f W h a t Response of Commodity Prices to China's Growth Surprises 1/ (In percent)Sources: Bloomberg; and Fund staff calculations.1/The response denotes the coefficient from individualregressions in whichthe dependent variable is the percent change of each commodity price (spot or future) over the three days following each data release. The only explanatory variable is a surprise in China's industrial value added growth (the difference between the actual year-on-year change and Bloomberg's median forecast at the time of the data release), scaled by the standard deviation of historical surprises. Red bars denote that the coefficient is significant at the 95 percent confidence level. The data span from March 2005 to December 2014. Page 15 Uruguay: Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) Sources of Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized External An abrupt surge in global High/Medium Medium/Low ( financial market volatility, tighter global financial conditions, and persistent U.S. dollar strength. Bond yields would increase and there could be a slowdown or reversal of capital flows into Uruguay. The peso depreciation would put upward pressure on inflation. It could also raise the default rate on FX loans to unhedged borrowers. Near-term public sector financing risks would be limited given comfortable levels of liquid dollar assets and high average debt maturity. External financing risks would be contained by the high level of reserves and the high share of FDI-financing of the current account deficit. Protracted period of slower High/Medium growth in advanced and emerging economies / China. Sharply lower growth in the region. Significant disruptions in global commodity, financial, and goods markets due to increased geopolitical tensions. A slowdown in FDI inflows due to a darker external outlook, lower commodity prices, or tighter global financial conditions. A slowdown in global demand could trigger a further decline in Uruguay’s export prices, as two-thirds of Uruguay’s exports are linked to agricultural commodities. However, the decline in oil prices that would likely accompany such a scenario would buffer the adverse impact by reducing Uruguay’s import bill. A sharp slowdown in Argentina and Brazil could adversely impact Uruguay through trade, tourism and FDI channels. Low ( The recent investment boom in renewable energy and the current low level of oil prices would temper the adverse effects of potential oil market disruptions. Low High ( Averaging 5¼ percent of GDP from 2003–12, FDI over- financed Uruguay’s current account deficits for over a decade and fostered strong productivity gains. A sharp slowdown in FDI to Uruguay would hurt medium term growth prospects. At the same time, a softening in FDI flows would come hand in hand with a decline in capital goods imports, lowering the current account deficits and external financing needs. Page 16 Domestic Delay in tightening the fiscal stance. Increased mining revenues in the medium term. The fiscal withdrawal projected for 2015 would not be sufficient to stabilize the net debt to GDP ratio under staff’s baseline macroeconomic projections. A delay in tightening fiscal policy beyond 2015 would raise the possibility of a more austere procyclical adjustment later, especially if external shocks were to raise the debt burden. ↑ The start of large-scale iron mining would boost investment, and eventually export and fiscal revenues in the medium term. The current account could potentially widen in the initial phase of the project due to FDI-financed capital goods imports.