Growth has decelerated but remains solid . After averaging 7.7 percent in 2010–11, real GDP growth moderated to 3.9 percent in 2012, mostly owing to lower export and tourism revenues from Argentina and Brazil, and a drop in hydroelectric output due to a drought. Staff’s growth projection of 4 percent for 2013 reflects a rebound in hydroelectric output in the first half of the year as well as renewed momentum in commodity exports and domestic demand, in particular private consumption. Private investment remains close to historic highs as a share of GDP although it has decelerated somewhat after a boom in 2012 (Figure 2). Unemployment, which averaged 6¾ percent in the six months through August, is near historic lows. The Selected Issues Paper Agricultural Land Prices–A Channel in the Transmission of Global Commodity Price Shocks on Economic Activit by Juan Yepez, examines the impact of food commodity prices on agricultural land prices in Uruguay and the region in the last decade, and the role played by agricultural land prices in transmitting commodity price shocks to the broader economy. 2010H12011H12012H12013H1 Real GDP growth Real GDP Real GDP (excl. hydroelectric output) Source:Banco Central del Uruguay and Fund staff estimates. Page 6 Inflation remains above the central bank’s target range of 4–6 percent and has edged up recently (Figure 3). Nontradables inflation has averaged about 9 percent since mid- 2011, compared to slightly less than 8 percent in the previous three years. Headline inflation, after rising in 2012Q3 owing mostly to a jump in food prices, temporarily dipped to 7.5 percent in December 2012 as the authorities lowered administered prices and took other temporary measures. The lower December inflation rate contributed to slower real wage growth in the first half of 2013 as many wage contracts are indexed to end-year inflation, helping to contain inflation pressures. However, inflation climbed back to 9 percent in September 2013 due to the recent rise in energy prices and the peso depreciation. Twelve-month-ahead inflation expectations have risen to about 8 percent from 7.5 percent half a year ago. The current account deficit has widened significantly (Figure 4). Of the total increase in the current account deficit—from 2.9 percent of GDP in 2011 to 5.4 percent of GDP in 2012— about two thirds reflected a widening of the trade deficit, mostly due to higher imports of capital goods associated with the construction of the Montes del Plata pulp mill and a surge in oil imports for electricity generation after the drought. In addition, net services revenues, mainly tourism, weakened in the second half of 2012, reflecting weak flows from Argentina and Brazil. Although the trade balance has been normalizing in 2013—with a sharp drop in oil imports and buoyant soy exports—the services balance has weakened further, reflecting a continued decline in tourism revenues from Argentina, increased travel by Uruguayans to Argentina, and higher services imports associated with hydrocarbon exploration. The portfolio inflow surge that had started in early 2012 came to a stop in June . The sharp increase in the foreign purchases of locally-issued, peso-denominated public securities in spring 2012 was spurred by Uruguay’s new investment grade rating, wider interest rate differentials (in particular relative to Brazil), and an improvement in global risk appetite. At first, most of the inflows went into short-maturity central bank securities. After the central bank introduced a reserve requirement on nonresidents’ purchases of central bank paper in September 2012, flows rotated into central government notes (Box 2). The inflows ground to a near halt in June, amid generalized financial volatility in emerging markets following the Fed’s tapering announcement and after Uruguayan authorities announced in late May that they would extend the reserve requirements for nonresidents’ purchases of central bank paper to purchases of central government paper. Total foreign holdings of locally-issued peso-denominated public securities were broadly flat between May and September. The real effective exchange rate (REER) has depreciated moderately since May, after appreciating strongly in the previous year . The REER strengthened 13 percent in the twelve months through April 2013, with particularly pronounced appreciations against Uruguay’s 2010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q1 Headline Inflation 12-month ahead inflation expectations (avg.) Consumer Prices (y-o-y, in percent)Source: Instituto Nacionalde Estadistica. Page 7 main trading partners, Argentina and Brazil (19 and 14 percent, respectively). The peso weakened by 16 percent against the U.S. dollar between late-May and end September, but the REER depreciation was smaller at about 8 percent between (from May to August), since the currencies of Argentina and Brazil also depreciated against the U.S. dollar over the same period. Staff estimates that the REER remains slightly on the strong side (0–10 percent, see Box 3). Credit continues to expand at a solid pace, but remains modest relative to GDP (Figure 5). Credit to households—mostly denominated in local currency—has been growing by about 8 percent (y- o-y) in real terms in recent months, while credit to firms—mostly denominated in U.S. dollars— has been growing at about 18 percent (y-o-y). The stock of credit to the private sector stood at 24 percent of GDP in August 2013. The growth of house prices moderated in 2012. Most of the expansion in the real estate market in recent years had been concentrated in the urban luxury segment, and according to anecdotal evidence, has received heavy foreign investment (mainly from Argentina). The vast majority of real estate transactions are done in cash (household mortgages stood at 4 percent of GDP in July 2013, broadly unchanged from levels in recent years). Tight foreign exchange restrictions in Argentina, and a new bilateral tax treaty on information exchange between Argentina and Uruguay, appear to have cooled the market, with the growth of house prices softening in 2012. Market participants pointed out that this trend continued in The Selected Issues Paper Competitiveness Trends in Uruguay , by Garth P. Nicholls, looks at the evolution of Uruguay’s exports structure and its drivers in the past decade, and discusses the balance of payments stability assessment. Real Exchange Rates (Index 2005 =100) Multilateral 1/ Bilateral Argentina 1/ Bilateral BrazilSource: Fund staff calculations based on Instituto Nacional de Estadistica data. 1/ The real exchange rate against Argentina is calculated using the unofficial CPI for Argentina and the average of the unofficial and official exchange rates for the Argentine peso. Average Price of Apartments by Square Meter (Montevideo, deflated by CPI) Source: Fund staff calculations based on Instituto Nacionalde Estadistica data. Page 8