Confronting inflation remains a priority . Inflation taxes low income households and presents an obstacle for financial de-dollarization. Inflation persisting above the target range also creates the risk of unhinging inflation expectations and prevents the use of monetary policy as a countercyclical tool. Bringing CPI inflation to the mid-point of the target range requires a comprehensive disinflation effort . The recent decline in oil prices will create an excellent window of opportunity to bring inflation closer to the target range. A strategy to reduce inflation further to 5 percent, the mid- point of the target range, should include maintaining tight macroeconomic policies, a strategy for reducing the backward-looking indexation of wages, steps towards strengthening the central bank’s influence on inflation expectations through forward-looking communication, and enhanced autonomy for the Banco Central del Uruguay (BCU). If implemented together, the measures would be mutually reinforcing and hence bring down the cost of the disinflation. A comprehensive disinflation strategy along these lines would also eliminate the need to resort to ad hoc measures— such as fiscally costly VAT cuts—to hold inflation down in the case of further commodity price shocks. Policy stance . The slowdown in M1+ growth and the substantial increase in real interest rates since mid-2013 represent a welcome tightening in financial conditions. The current monetary policy stance—with short term interest rates about 600 basis points above inflation—is consistent with the goal of lowering inflation. In order to durably reduce inflation to the middle of the target range, monetary policy needs to stay tight for some time, with appropriate re- Page 17 calibration if economic circumstances change. Tighter fiscal policy would also help lower inflation by tempering the growth of domestic demand. Reducing inflation persistence . Reducing the indexation of wages to past inflation is critical for lessening inflation persistence and lowering the cost of disinflation. The government’s wage-setting guidelines for the bargaining rounds of 2015 and 2016 should solely recommend nominal contracts. To ensure the success of the effort, it will be critical to lower inflation further and get a tighter grip on inflation expectations through well-crafted central bank communication on the direction of monetary policy. Improving the policy framework . A major currency depreciation spurred in part by the Fed’s tapering announcement in mid-2013 fueled inflationary pressures and created serious challenges for the disinflationary effort within the monetary framework introduced in mid- 2013. Therefore, it seems too early to assess the efficacy of this framework in anchoring expectations. However, given the challenges involved in predicting money demand, it is important that the authorities monitor the performance of the new framework closely and remain open to considering other frameworks as needed over time. To enhance the framework, there would be merit in allowing more variable M1+ growth targets to ensure that the monetary policy stance is appropriately responsive to shocks and to avoid carrying over past errors in predicting money demand (Box 2). Further enhancing central bank communication and autonomy Communication . There is scope to strengthen the expectations channel of monetary policy through well-crafted communication efforts. Providing a more detailed assessment of the impact of money growth on inflation, publishing inflation forecasts, and explaining how monetary policy would respond to shocks could strengthen the BCU’s influence on inflation expectations. Autonomy . Though no institutional framework guarantees success, there is evidence that central banks that pursue their established objectives independent of political considerations are more effective in reaching their goals. In this regard, there is scope to increase the BCU’s autonomy through legislation that delinks the terms for the President and Board members from the electoral cycle, as was envisaged in the draft central bank law submitted to Uruguay’s Parliament in December 2005. Authorities’ views on inflation dynamics . The authorities indicated that they expected inflation to trend down in the near term given the tight monetary policy stance and the eventual pass-through of the drop in global crude oil prices to retail prices. They noted that some of the recent decline in administrative prices reflected structural changes, for instance cheaper electricity production given the coming-on-stream of wind power. The authorities considered the current policy mix to be consistent with lowering inflation and did not consider fiscal policy to have a significant effect on inflation at this time. They felt that inflationary risks from exchange rate depreciation had lessened with the real exchange rate being near equilibrium. Page 18 Authorities’ views on the monetary policy framework and central bank autonomy authorities took note of the staff’s view that allowing for more variable monetary growth targets may be necessary to enhance the responsiveness of the monetary policy stance to shocks and to avoid carrying over past errors in predicting money demand. Nevertheless, they felt that communicating more variable targets might be a challenge. The authorities considered that the BCU has an appropriate level of autonomy, giving it significant flexibility in choosing the monetary policy settings.