The authorities’ fiscal consolidation path would put net debt on a downward trajectory . The government is expected to have avoided an overly pro-cyclical fiscal stance in 2016 by allowing the fiscal deficit to widen, while locking in the fiscal adjustment for 2017. This course of action was in line with earlier staff advice, that a strong commitment to the structural adjustment path for the primary balance would provide room for automatic fiscal stabilizers. The announced measures are expected to have a lasting effect on the primary balance. However, as the economy has slowed more than expected, fiscal settings have tightened more than originally expected. As growth rebounds, staff projects the primary surplus to exceed 0.5 percent of GDP in 2019, allowing for a gradual reduction in gross and net public debt. The focus on fiscal consolidation is appropriate, although there is some space to respond to unanticipated shocks. Debt levels have risen sizably in recent years. As such, financial markets are keeping a close watch on the implementation of the fiscal adjustment aimed at ensuring fiscal sustainability. Moreover, the shares of foreign-currency denominated debt and debt This assessment is based on the change in the cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance and does not take into account investment expenditures through PPPs, which are outside the consolidated public sector, nor possible positive effects from improvements in consumer and business confidence owing to the fiscal package. The inclusion of the central bank in the public accounts, including in the debt data, implies a higher level of recorded public debt and higher financing needs. Uruguay is one of the few countries in the world using this presentation. Page 19 held by non-residents exceed the standard benchmarks for debt profile risk indicators (Annex III). he announced structural consolidation, reducing the overall deficit to 2.5 percent of GDP by 2019, will help maintain strong financial buffers. Moreover, the magnitude of the planned fiscal adjustment to stabilize and trim public debt relative to GDP appears realistic and, as fiscal credibility is preserved, there is space to allow fiscal stabilizers to operate. Looking beyond the government term (which runs through 2019), population aging will hit Uruguay before other countries in the region. The annual deficit of the defined-benefit pillar of the pension system (excluding special regimes) is projected to grow from around 0.7 percent of GDP in 2015 to more than 2 percent in 2050 and will require further reforms, including to limit the deficit of special pension regimes and reduce the risks coming from the indexation mismatch in the balance sheet of the public insurance company. Improvements in the management and profitability of public companies are essential to strengthening the fiscal balance . Given the extensive role of public enterprises in Uruguay, improvements in their management and coordination are vital. The recent recapitalization of the state-owned oil distribution company, ANCAP, has strengthened its liquidity position. The government has contracted a hedge to limit the financial risk from a large oil price increase in world markets. The scope for passing through such increases into (administered) domestic fuel prices may be constrained in the near term, given the limited pass through of the prior decline in oil prices, which supports the restoration of ANCAP’s financial soundness. However, staff advised that, it would be useful to allow retail fuel prices to fully adjust with international oil prices as soon as feasible. Basing this on a transparent formula, would remove the risks to the budget inherent to the stabilization of domestic fuel prices and promote efficient fuel usage. Consideration could be given to implementing such an approach once the current oil price hedges expire to continue to ward off a re-emergence of quasi-fiscal risks. Fiscal adjustment should be implemented in a manner that fosters economic growth as much as possible, which hinges on the execution of planned infrastructure investment . The 2017 tax package is expected to have a limited adverse effect on consumption, with an increase in personal income tax rates for middle-to-high-income earners, partly offset by lower VAT rates for electronic payments. On the expenditure side, a rationalization of the public wage bill and public enterprises’ expenditures will be important to ensure a durable consolidation, and would create space for higher multiplier spending on public investment. In particular, regional comparisons of infrastructure quality show a clear need for transportation infrastructure upgrades. Yet, while as part of the fiscal adjustment, public investment was lowered by 0.9 percent of GDP in 2015, PPPs are only slowly taking off. The recent creation of a U.S.$ 350 million fund for infrastructure projects represents a promising step toward mobilizing financial resources for PPPs. According to the budget, between a fourth and a third of road and railroad infrastructure projects for the period For defined-contribution pensions, this company bears the risk of any divergence between the wage growth (to which pensions are indexed) and the nominal interest rate. Page 20 2015–19 are to be financed through PPPs. PPPs can alleviate the initial cost of investment to the budget, but will require effective monitoring and oversight, as well as strong control of explicit and contingent liabilities. Beyond 2017, the authorities should assess the possible need for additional measures, on top of the built-in expenditure rationalization, to ensure the achievement of their medium-term fiscal targets. Active debt management remains important to reduce financial vulnerabilities and interest payments . Financial markets have acknowledged Uruguay’s prudent debt management strategy that has lengthened the maturity of the debt, smoothed the redemption profile, and reduced interest cost by taking advantage of low international interest rates via successful dollar issuances and a recent interest rate swap operation (into Japanese Yen) with the World Bank. However, the share of debt denominated in foreign currency has increased again since 2013 as demand for peso assets weakened. Building on the recently created Public Debt Management Committee, the fiscal and monetary authorities could usefully foster the development of a more liquid and accessible local-currency bond market which would help lower the dollarization of public debt and further reduce external vulnerabilities. Useful steps could include the establishment of benchmarks for long-term peso debt instruments. Stronger anchors could enhance the long-term credibility and counter-cyclicality of fiscal policy . The current rule, which limits the annual increase in net debt, has accommodated a strong increase in net debt during recent years. An overall debt limit could become part of the rule, as a reference for determining the annual limit on the increase in net debt. This would prevent the debt from reaching uncomfortable levels and strengthen confidence in the sustainability of Uruguay’s public finances. Furthermore, the annual limits on debt increases could adjust to the economic cycle, to permit the operation of fiscal stabilizers. The authorities confirmed their determination to lower the fiscal deficit to 2½ percent of GDP by 2019 to underpin fiscal sustainability . They expected that the fiscal package for 2017 would be sufficient to reach this target, in part because of its careful design to support economic growth. Indeed, they considered that overall fiscal policy would be supportive of growth in 2017 when taking into account all elements - the targeting of tax increases at higher income levels, the forthcoming expansion of infrastructure investments, including through PPPs, and the positive confidence effects of the adjustment. In particular, under the rule’s escape clauses, which were invoked in five of the past eight years. X Y V Page 21