GDP growth is projected to exhibit a modest further recovery to 1.4 percent of GDP in 2017, as Brazil and Argentina emerge from recession . The external environment is expected to strengthen in 2017, together with private consumption (with the recovery of confidence). However, the planned contractionary fiscal stance may impose some drag on overall domestic demand, and production is expected to be dampened by extended oil refinery maintenance. Financial conditions are expected to remain broadly supportive, underpinned by accommodative global financial conditions, a stable banking system, and a small expansion in credit (though credit is not a principal source of financing and growth in Uruguay). Growth is projected to recover to a potential rate of 3 percent over the medium term, as domestic demand regains strength. Inflation is expected to slow and remain well below 9 percent in 2017, tapering to about 6 percent in the medium term, while the output gap gradually closes. The current account deficit is expected to remain at around 2¼ percent of GDP in 2017, with a pick-up in exports but higher oil prices, before edging up to 2½ percent in the medium-term as domestic demand recovers to match productive capacity. Financial stability risks seem limited Staff stress tests confirm that credit and liquidity risks remain contained, and that the banking system could withstand even a large exchange rate shock that impaired loans to non-hedged borrowers. Non-performing loans, while historically very low, have doubled as a share of gross loans over the past two years when the economy weakened, but provisions for loan losses are high. After several years of decline, banks’ capital adequacy ratio has stabilized and provides adequate loss-absorption capacity. High structural costs, including labor costs, and recent changes in taxation however weigh on banks’ profitability. Banks’ liquidity is ample, supported by a funding model that relies for more than 85 percent on deposits (with a diversified depositor base), high reserve requirements, and a low level of credit. EE R oo mm Page 15 Financial Stability Map Uruguay Global ill pp pp pp pp nu nu dg ay Page 16 The risks to the outlook are both external and domestic External risks . Although Uruguay’s regional economic ties have lessened, a slower-than- expected recovery in Argentina and Brazil could weigh on the economy, as could weaker-than- projected growth in China, which has become the most important destination for Uruguay’s merchandise exports. Non-resident deposits (mostly from Argentina) have declined to about 15 percent of total deposits, making a potential rapid withdrawal manageable in light of banks’ plentiful foreign currency liquidity. A tightening in global financial conditions could raise Uruguay’s cost of financing. The share of nonresident holdings of Uruguay’s public debt increased in 2015, mostly because of valuation effects, and at almost 58 percent, could also pose some external risk, although maturities are long. Domestic risks . If the recovery in 2017 were weaker than expected, adhering to the planned fiscal consolidation plan would risk intensifying the slowdown, while a more expansionary fiscal stance would pose risks for debt. On the positive side, a potential large foreign investment (about 7 percent of GDP) in a third pulp mill presents upside risk to growth. Uruguay’s strong liquidity buffers and the flexible exchange rate should enable an orderly adjustment to shocks Public sector financing risks are limited by sizeable liquid financial assets (about 6 percent of GDP) sufficient to cover debt service for 18 months, buttressed by the government’s access to contingent credit lines at international financial institutions of 4½ percent of GDP. The authorities’ willingness to allow the exchange rate to adjust in response to shifts in economic fundamentals has been key to absorbing external shocks. The BCU’s gross reserves are ample relative to standard prudential benchmarks, and stand at 140 percent of the upper bound of the ARA metric range for Uruguay, and could help cushion severe external shocks (see Annex I). The authorities emphasized the high degree of uncertainty in the international environment . They considered that Uruguay had managed the regional and global volatility well, as evidenced by ongoing economic growth and the continued positive differentiation of Uruguay relative to other emerging economies in financial markets. They noted that economic confidence had increased in recent months, supported by the government’s fiscal adjustment package and the fall of unemployment to its lowest level in a year in October. Looking ahead, they stressed the prospects fro a third paper pulp mill, which would entail the largest investment in the country’s history, as well as the positive outlook for increased investment via PPPs. In addition, Uruguay’s strong financial buffers would support the authorities in navigating possible further shocks. Page 17 Risk Assessment Matrix Sources of Likelihood Impact if Realized Policy Response Low/Medium Low/Medium (↓) Pass-through lower oil import A sharp slowdown in global demand prices as a buffer Use exchange rate as a shock absorber. Allow automatic fiscal stabilizers to operate. Maintain flexible exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer. Use liquidity buffers if necessary. could trigger a further decline in Uruguay’s export prices, as two- thirds of exports are agricultural. Medium/High Medium (↓) A withdrawal of investors from EMs and portfolio capital outflows could raise Uruguay’s cost of financing and weaken growth across the region. High/Medium High (↓) Maintain flexible exchange Continued weakness in Argentina rate. and Brazil would have adverse impacts through exports, tourism, and FDI (averaging 5 percent of GDP from 2003–14; one-third from these neighbors). Allow automatic fiscal stabilizers to operate. Step up structural reforms. Medium Medium (↓) Allow exchange rate to adjust A sharp appreciation of the peso, with limited room to lower interest rates given high inflation. (absent disorderly market conditions). In certain circumstances, CFMs can be useful to manage the risks associated with large and volatile capital flows. They should not, however, substitute for warranted macroeconomic adjustment. The new oil price hedge would shield the budget. Pass through oil price changes over the medium term Avoid pro-cyclical policies. Pass through lower oil import prices to help reduce inflation. High Low (↓) A sharp rise in oil prices would raise import and fiscal costs (as pass- through would likely be limited). The recent investment boom in renewable energy would temper the impact. High Medium/Low ( ↑ ) Uruguay imports all its oil (20 percent of imports); a drop in oil prices would lower the import bill and have a positive fiscal and macro impact. Risk Significant slowdown in China. Sharp rise in risk premia with flight to safety. Structurally weak growth in neighboring economies. Significant portfolio capital inflows. Geopolitical risks, leading to increased volatility in oil prices. Persistently low oil prices. Page 18