The central bank gradually tightened the monetary policy stance through March 2013 and announced changes to the policy framework in May 2013 (Figure 6). Between June 2012 and March 2013 , the central bank raised reserve requirements on bank deposits and notched up the policy rate by a cumulative 50 basis points. The rate, at 9.25 percent from end-December, remained 300–400 basis points below staff’s estimates of the neutral short-term interest rate. The central bank stepped up its pace of reserve accumulation in early 2013 in order to limit the appreciation of the peso amidst heavy capital inflows. In the meanwhile, concerns grew on the fiscal cost of sterilizing the reserves, and the currency appreciation against Argentina and Brazil. In June 2013 , the authorities announced a new reserve requirement of 50 percent for nonresidents’ purchases of locally-issued Treasury notes to discourage further portfolio inflows and replaced the overnight interest rate target with targets for M1 plus saving deposits (M1+). They also announced a widening of the inflation-target-band to 3–7 percent starting in July 2014 from 4–6 percent. The M1+ targets for 2013Q3 and 2013Q4 (12.5–13 percent and 15–17 percent, respectively) represent a broadly unchanged pace of monetary expansion relative to 2013H1 but a slower pace of growth than in the last two years. The authorities envisage a further reduction in the rate of M1+ growth over the next two years (to 8 percent by mid-2015—which would be lower than the sum of potential growth and the mid-point of the inflation-target). Since July 2013 , monetary conditions fluctuated widely as the markets adjusted to the new framework and the authorities fine-tuned their operations. In July, the overnight interbank rate dipped sharply, averaging 4.5 percent. In August and September, the central bank tightened liquidity, which drove the overnight interest rate to an average of 17.5 percent. In early October, nominal peso yields for 1–60 months maturities were about 4 percentage points above their levels in May. The fiscal deficit widened in 2012 and fiscal policy is projected to remain slightly expansionary in 2013 (Figure 7). The primary balance declined to -0.2 percent of GDP in 2012 from 2 percent in 2011. About half of the decline was due to one-off transfers and the higher cost of electricity generation (using imported oil) at the state energy enterprise. The other half largely reflected the greater-than-expected costs of the broadening of the pension and health care systems (under reforms initiated in 2008, with a sizable wave of new beneficiaries added in 2012 in a process that will go on until 2016). Although the primary balance is expected to improve to a 0.6 percent of GDP surplus in 2013, thanks largely to the recovery in the profits of the state energy enterprise, fiscal policy is poised to add another small positive impulse mainly The central bank had abandoned M1+ as its operational target in 2007Q3 and replaced it with a target for the overnight interest rate. Page 9 due to a rise in public investment spending. Under unchanged policies, the deficits of the overall public sector would settle around 2¼ percent of GDP in the medium term—about 1.0–1.5 percentage points of GDP higher than envisaged in last year’s budget—and the gross public debt to GDP ratio would remain broadly unchanged at about 60 percent of GDP. Net debt (gross debt minus liquid assets) would remain around 36–37 percent of GDP between 2013 and 2015. The authorities continued implementing a debt management strategy aimed at reducing vulnerabilities . As a result of active liability management, Uruguay’s public debt profile has improved significantly in recent years—with a much reduced share of foreign currency debt and a high average maturity (Box 4). Moreover, the public sector has accumulated a considerable stock of liquid assets, which amounted to 22.4 percent of GDP at end-2012. The authorities have also secured contingent credit lines with multilateral agencies of some 4 percent of GDP. Since spring 2012, Uruguay has obtained investment grade sovereign ratings from four major rating agencies and has access to foreign funding at favorable costs (4.5 percent for a US$ denominated 10- year bond issued in August 2013). The government’s newly-issued guidelines for the ongoing wage negotiation round seek to restrain the growth of real wages. The ongoing negotiation round, which started in July and will end around November, will affect about one third of workers. The government has recommended that workers and enterprises set wages for three years with two options for setting annual wage increases. The first option would entail increases in line with the central bank’s inflation target (with an ex-post correction based on actual inflation) plus a real adjustment between zero and 3 percent, dependent on GDP growth and the performance of the sector; there would be clauses that allow renegotiation in the event of large shocks. The second option—in a break with past guidelines—would entail contracts without backward indexation. Negotiations continue amid labor unrest; the authorities expect real wage growth to moderate from about 4 percent in the last two years to 2–2.5 percent in the new round. However, the take up of non-indexed contracts is likely to be limited. Public Sector Gross Debt, Assets, And Net Debt Gross Debt Liquid Assets Net Debt Source: Ministerio de Economia y Finanzas. Fiscal Impulse (Overall public sector, in percent of GDP)Sources: Ministerio de Economia yFinanzas and Fund staff calculations. Page 10