Heightened external risks call for continued vigilant regulation and supervision of the highly dollarized banking system A comprehensive set of regulations for mitigating FX-related credit, market, and liquidity risks is in place (Table 3). The authorities’ plan to impose the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio requirements by currency is welcome; staff recommended that the new requirements also take into account the higher potential run-off rates of nonresident deposits. Staff also encouraged continued proactive efforts to monitor the risks associated with FX-denominated lending, and recommended applying higher capital risk-weights to FX loans to unhedged borrowers. Authorities’ views on FX exposures . The authorities did not see a need to further tighten regulations related to FX lending to unhedged borrowers, noting that verifying the currency of borrowers’ earnings would present a challenge for applying different risk weights to FX loans to unhedged versus hedged borrowers. They argued that the provisioning rules, with banks periodically assessing the payment ability of borrowers under real currency depreciations of 20 and 35 percent, ensured that banks hold greater cushions against FX loans to unhedged borrowers. ChileBrazilPeruColombiaUruguayMexico Bank Credit to the Private Sector (Percent of GDP, 2014) Sources: WorldEconomic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. Page 22 Staff recommended making the supervisory stress tests more stringent and requiring banks to incorporate the test results into their capital planning . Staff welcomed the authorities’ plan to differentiate the impact of shocks across corporate versus household borrowers, and by the currency denomination of the loans, starting with the 2015 stress tests. Staff pointed out that the real depreciations assumed in the “adverse” scenario of the latest supervisory stress tests (carried out in 2014Q2) were less than five percent, calling to make them more stringent. Staff also urged to make the stress test results more binding, by requiring any banks that faced capital shortfalls in the tests to submit capital plans for the authorities’ approval, describing how they would deal with contingencies. Authorities’ views on the stress tests . With banks adequately meeting the current regulatory and supervisory requirements, the authorities saw no significant risks to financial stability. In responding to staff’s query on the stringency of supervisory stress tests, they discussed the results of internal stress tests (prepared for the Financial Stability Committee) which featured deeper exchange rate stress. The authorities argued that any capital deficiencies resulting from the considered shocks could be resolved through recapitalization without creating systemic risks. They explained that with the planned introduction in 2015 of banks’ self-assessment of capital adequacy, they would start a dialogue with banks on the implications of the stress test results. Progress continues towards implementing the recommendations of the 2012 FSAP authorities explained that an organizational change of the Superintendency of Financial Services (SSF) to enhance the supervisory capacity will be incorporated in the 2015 budget. Staff welcomed the efforts to strengthen the safety net and crisis management through an information exchange agreement between the SSF and COPAB—the deposit insurance fund. Moreover, the authorities are considering amendments to the bank resolution legal framework, consistent with the 2012 FSAP and recent Fund technical assistance. The authorities also mentioned that they are planning to implement a simulation exercise for bank resolution to enhance coordination among involved agencies. The authorities’ May 2014 stress test entails shocks of -3.2 percent for real GDP, 11.3 percent for the exchange rate, 9.1 percent for inflation, and increments of 335 and 70 basis points in country risk and international interest rates, respectively. Page 23 Table 3. Uruguay: Key Prudential Regulations for FX-Related Risks Capital Higher risk weights are applied to FX loans compared to peso loans to the nonfinancial sector. FX loans: Peso loans (except housing): Peso housing loans: 125 percent 100 percent 75 percent Capital requirements for market risk are applied to open FX positions by currency (8 percent for currencies with an associated sovereign rating of AA or above and 10 percent for other currencies). Provisioning for Specific and differentiated provisioning rules are applied for anticipated (not realized) losses on FX loans. loan losses FX commercial loans: FX consumer loans: Banks assess borrowers’ payment ability under real Monthly payments do not exceed 15 percent of income peso depreciations of 20 or 35 percent. → Higher provisions required if a problem is anticipated in payment ability. (as opposed to 30 percent for peso loans). → Considered normal. Monthly payments exceed 15 percent of income. → Higher provisions required. Liquidity Differentiated liquidity requirements are applied to FX-denominated or nonresident liabilities. FX liabilities to residents: FX liabilities to nonresidents: Peso liabilities: Up to 180 days: 25 percent 30 percent Up to 29 days: 17 percent Over 180 days: 19 percent 30 to 90 days: 9 percent 91 to 180 days: 6 percent 181 to 366 days: 4 percent Liquidity requirements must be met with liquid assets (for example, cash, demand deposits at BCU or foreign banks, or government bonds) in FX and local currency, respectively. Limits on open The net asset or liability position, defined as the difference between assets (excluding operating fixed assets) and liabilities, FX positions cannot exceed 150 percent of net worth. Reserve Differentiated minimum reserve requirements are applied to FX liabilities. FX liabilities to residents: FX liabilities to nonresidents: Peso liabilities: Up to 180 days: 18 percent 18 percent Up to 29 days: 15 percent Over 180 days: 14 percent 30 to 90 days: 9 percent 91 to 180 days: 6 percent 181 to 366 days: 4 percent Effective August 1, 2013, marginal reserve requirements are applied, consisting of 45 percent on FX deposits and 25 percent of peso deposits on the daily average balance minus the corresponding April 2011 balance. FX and peso reserve requirements must be met with cash and deposits at the BCU. Both the minimum and marginal reserves at BCU are remunerated. Page 24