The outlook is for growth to be somewhat below 4 percent in 2014–15, with gradual reductions in inflation and the current account deficit Growth is projected to soften to 3.5 percent in 2014, with the phasing-out of the rebound in hydroelectric generation subtracting 1.5 percentage points, and the scheduled start of production and exports by the pulp mill adding 1 percentage point. A further slowdown in public spending in 2015 (with a roughly constant fiscal budget in the aftermath of the elections) along with a gradual tightening of monetary conditions should keep growth in 2015–18 somewhat below the potential growth rate of 4 percent. Inflation is projected to ease over time as monetary policy is tightened, but the recent depreciation of the peso against the U.S. dollar implies some upside risk for inflation in the year ahead. The current account is projected to improve gradually in line with a recovery in external demand. Risks to the growth outlook are mostly to the downside in the near term. As a small open economy, Uruguay is exposed to risks of inward spillovers (See Annex I for an analysis of Uruguay’s external linkages and the importance of global spillovers for Uruguay’s growth). It also faces domestic overheating risks. In the medium term, iron-ore mining may provide a boost to growth. Export commodity prices. About two-thirds of Uruguay’s exports are commodity based— mostly food related. Although likely to be less sensitive to growth than energy and metal prices, a sustained decline in food prices—e.g., in case of lower than anticipated emerging market growth potential or a sharp slowdown in China—would hurt growth in Uruguay. At the same time, a decline in energy prices that would likely accompany such a scenario would help buffer the adverse effects though a lower import bill. Weaker growth in the region. Uruguay has significant economic connections with Argentina and Brazil, through trade, tourism, and FDI flows. Prospects for these countries could imply downside risks for Uruguay through direct spillovers or confidence effects. Oil prices. There is a threat of higher oil prices in the short-term due to geo-political events. Tighter global financial conditions. Potential market volatility associated with the prospective exit from accommodative monetary conditions in advanced economies or a re-emergence of financial strains in Europe could lead to a tightening in global financial conditions and peso depreciation. The adverse impact on bank balance sheets (stemming from high credit dollarization) would be contained given broadly adequate capital and the strong level of foreign assets of the banks and the public sector. At the same time, the tightening of global financial conditions associated with the normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies could weaken FDI into Uruguay and weigh on growth. Domestic overheating. If monetary conditions were not to tighten sufficiently or if the ongoing wage negotiation round were to result in strong growth in real wages, inflationary pressures would rise further and competitiveness would weaken. Such an over-heating Page 11 scenario would make the economy more vulnerable to external shocks and reduce the scope for a soft landing and a gradual adjustment of policies in the period ahead Natural resource revenues . On the upside, the start of large-scale iron mining would boost investment, and eventually export and fiscal revenues in the medium run. The current account could widen due to the FDI-financed imports of capital goods in the initial phase of the project. Uruguay: Risk Assessment Matrix Sources of risk Up/downside Likelihood Impact Large decline in Uruguay’s export prices (due to lower than anticipated emerging market growth potential, sharp slowdown in growth in China) Protracted economic and financial volatility in emerging markets triggered by prospective exit from unconventional monetary policy in advanced economies Re-emergence of financial stress in the euro area and tightening in global financial conditions l a n r e t x Sharply lower growth in the region Global oil price shock triggered by geopolitical events c i t s e m o Domestic overheating followed by a hard landing Increased mining revenues in the medium term   Note: The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path discussed in this report (which is the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding this baseline. The RAM reflects staff's views on the source of risks and overall level of concerns as of the time of discussions with the authorities. The Uruguayan economy is generally well placed to manage these risks as liquidity buffers are strong, external stability risks are modest, and the financial system is unlikely to act as an important propagator of downside shocks (the policy responses to adverse inward spillovers are discussed in paragraph 34). The public sector has strong liquidity buffers . Fiscal financing risks are modest as the non- financial public sector has financial assets of 5.8 percent of GDP (the central government has liquid assets that would cover debt service needs through 2014) and has access to 4 percent of GDP in contingent credit lines. Central bank reserves are also strong—at end-2012, the Page 12 BCU had around 19 percent of GDP in free reserves (gross reserves minus reserve requirements against foreign currency denominated deposits). BCU’s reserves amply exceed various prudential benchmarks. External stability risks are limited . Although the peso appears somehat on the strong side, external financing risks are limited in the near term as central bank reserves are high and FDI prospects remain solid (Box 3). The financial system is small and appears resilient. Bank credit to the private sector is low at 24 percent of GDP. Most banks are liquid, with low loan-to-deposit ratios. Non-resident deposits are more than matched by banks’ liquid foreign assets and reserve requirements; the foreign assets of the commercial banks and the central bank exceed the sum of foreign- currency deposits and short term-external debt. The main point of vulnerability is that 27.5 percent of bank loans in foreign currency are to firms whose earnings are in local currency. That said, non-performing loans are less than 1.5 percent of total loans, and stress tests conducted during the recent FSAP suggest that banks can withstand significant shocks, despite some pockets of vulnerability. The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s outlook but saw more limited downside risks . They felt that the reduced trade and tourism linkages with Argentina would imply lower spillovers than in the past, and that the mostly commodity-based exports to Brazil could easily find markets elsewhere if Brazilian growth were to disappoint. They argued that an 2010201120122013 1/LA5 2/Regulatory capital in percent of risk-weighted assets16.113.712.812.416.0Non-performing loans in percent of total loans 1.01.31.51.42.8Non-performing loans in percent of total household loans3.53.13.53.8n.aSpecific loan-loss provisions in percent of non-performing loans 73.171.169.061.3n.aOperating costs in percent of gross income91.383.481.080.9n.aReturn on assets 3/0.80.81.01.31.8Return on equity 4/8.17.912.615.317.5Liquidity ratio 5/47.447.852.652.630.6Dollar loans in percent of total loans59.458.557.961.922.26/Dollar deposits in percent of total deposits 74.171.971.975.418.46/Non-resident deposits in percent of total deposits16.414.615.215.0n.aPrivate sector credit in percent of GDP19.720.522.224.031.8Household consumer credit in percent of GDP8.48.58.88.9n.aImplicit exchange rate risk 7/31.431.434.027.5n.a 1/ Latest available data (August 2013).3/ Annualized net income before extraordinary items and taxes from the beginning of the year until the reporting 6/ Excludes Brazil.7/ Share of foreign currency bank credit to unhedged borrowers. Selected Financial Soundness Indicators 2/ Median of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, for 2012. Definitions of soundness indicators vary by country.month, in percent of average value of total assets over the same period.4/ Same as footnote 3 but in percent of average value of capital over the same period.5/ Liquid assets with maturity up to 30 days in percent of total liabilities expiring within the same period. Sources: Banco Central del Uruguay, IMF Global Financial Stability Report, and Fund staff calculations. Page 13 eventual rebalancing of demand in China—from investment toward consumption—would likely improve Uruguay’s terms of trade by boosting food prices and lowering energy prices. They also stressed that the strong liquidity buffers built by Uruguay’s public sector eliminates the risk of debt-financing problems that Uruguay experienced in the past, and allow for a counter-cyclical policy response if adverse shocks were to occur.