The ongoing steadfast implementation of the 2014 Financial Inclusion Law promises to help increase peso deposits and competition in the peso market . In particular, the law requires employees to choose and designate a bank account on which their wage is paid, whereas that choice was previously made by the employer. Private banks can take advantage of the generalization of those payroll deposit accounts and financial incentives (lower VAT) for using electronic means of payment to increase their funding in peso. The development of the peso credit market—supported by such peso funding—could offer new income opportunities for banks, while the increased competition with the dominant public bank would lead to greater efficiency. Market deepening and prudential policies to discourage foreign currency deposits and loans could support de-dollarization. The financing of public infrastructure projects could be designed to foster the development of new capital market instruments in peso, for example by marketing part of the securities issues by dedicated investments funds or trusts to retail investors. On the regulatory side, reinstating differentiated reserve requirements on peso and foreign-currency deposits and introducing asymmetric liquidity requirements between peso and foreign currency liabilities could encourage banks to favor peso deposits. Supervision should remain alert to closely monitor banks’ exposures and contain stability risks . This monitoring will be facilitated by the implementation of the new International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in 2017, while the implementation of Basel III will strengthen the resilience of the system, through for instance the imposition of capital surcharges to the five domestic systemically important banks. The creation of new saving vehicles in peso would need to be accompanied by strong investor protection and efforts to improve financial education. The authorities expressed satisfaction with the functioning of the financial system, advances in the supervisory framework, and the ongoing progress in financial inclusion . They agreed that, in principle, it was helpful for reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits to exceed those on domestic currency deposits, and saw the equalization of requirements on peso and foreign currency deposits, that had resulted with a tightening of monetary policy, as temporary. Such differentiated reserve requirements would not be intended as a capital flow management measure, but a structural tool to limit dollarization and enhance financial stability. Page 25