Inflation is projected to decline gradually, supported by a negative output gap and the ongoing wage discussions. The new wage agreements offer a valuable opportunity to achieve a lasting reduction in inflation, as they are set in nominal terms, which should reduce inflation persistence, and as they include nominal wage increases that are lower for each subsequent year, gradually reducing cost pressures. Current projections foresee inflation moving into the 3–7 percent target range by 2019. Nonetheless, confronting inflation remains a priority, and is a precondition for de- dollarization which would support the transmission of monetary policy . Inflation in Uruguay has remained stubbornly high and above the level in other LA-6 countries. Lower inflation would protect the purchasing power of low-income households and increase scope to use monetary policy as a countercyclical tool. Moreover, securing the expected gradual decline in inflation would be especially important at this juncture, as surprise inflation could jeopardize sustained progress in reshaping the wage regime. Successfully bringing down inflation would also promote de-dollarization that would in turn improve the transmission of monetary policy and facilitate a virtuous cycle of improved inflation performance. Experience in other countries shows that incentives to internalize the risks of dollarization, the development of capital markets in local currency, and the de-dollarization of deposits would all contribute to a decline in credit dollarization. The government’s ongoing financial market initiatives (see below) can further support progress in these directions. Bringing inflation back to within the BCU’s target range requires an appropriately tight monetary policy. The change in the monetary policy framework in 2013––switching to an operational reference range for M1+ growth––and the progressive reduction in this reference range led to a rise in the interest rates and an overall tightening of monetary and financial conditions. In the face of inflation well above the central bank’s target, monetary conditions remained generally tight in 2016, aided by the appreciation of the exchange rate. Interest rates at maturities longer than three months stayed fairly stable, while short-term interest rates edged lower in the third quarter, and are below the level implied by a calibrated Taylor rule (Figure 3) and also below estimates of the neutral interest rate (see Box 3). Given a weak recovery and the procyclical fiscal tightening in 2017, the monetary stance remains sufficiently supportive of the disinflation effort. However, to bolster price stability and the credibility of monetary policy, the authorities should be ready to further tighten monetary conditions in 2017 if and when demand pressures pick up. See M. García-Escribano and S. Sosa, “What is Driving Financial De-Dollarization in Latin America,” IMF Working Paper 11/10 (2010) and L.A.V Catão and M.E. Terrones, “Financial De-Dollarization: A global Perspective and the Peruvian Experience,” IMF Working Paper 16/97 (2016). W oo Page 22 Box 3. Uruguay: Estimates of the Neutral Interest Rate The neutral real interest rate (NRIR) can be defined as the interest rate that is consistent with a closed output gap and stable inflation . This rate is not observable and can move over time, given changes in domestic and global macroeconomic conditions. Estimates of the neutral interest rate provide a benchmark to assess the stance of monetary policy, the gap between the neutral rate and the actual short-term real interest rate measuring the degree to which monetary policy is stimulating or contracting the economy. The estimates of the NRIR presented in this box are derived from the estimation of state- space models where the neutral rate is an unobserved state variable (see Williams and Laubach, 2003, and Magud and Tsounta, 2012). In particular, the Kalman filter is used to estimate a model assuming a common stochastic trend between short term and longer term nominal interest rates (Basdevant and others, 2004) as well as various forms of the Taylor rule. The model estimates for the NRIR range from 4 to 5½ percent . These levels have exceeded actual interest rates reflecting the persistence of inflation above the target range. However, the results need to be interpreted with caution since they closely depend on the underlying model used in the estimation. The movements in the estimates are also influenced strongly by those of the short-term rates. mm V mm V Page 23 There is scope to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy in the medium term. Reduce inflation persistence further. New wage agreements typically include backward indexation after 12 months or more to offset possible real wage losses. While a longer adjustment delay would be helpful in avoiding indexation in response to temporary price shocks (as the decline in inflation is expected to be gradual and irregular), staff recommended the full elimination of indexation provisions as expeditiously as possible. Strengthening the policy framework . Since 2013, the monetary authorities have applied the monetary framework in a flexible manner, repeatedly adjusting the reference range, and allowing interest rates to rise to higher levels. However, money demand has proven difficult to predict, and the growth rate for M1+ has undershot the reference range in eight out of the thirteen quarters of implementation. Staff reiterated its advice to closely monitor changes in money demand implied by the changes in deposit dollarization, in particular to avoid an unduly relaxed policy stance. The authorities could also usefully explore options to reduce the volatility of short-term interest rates, for example by using standing facilities to create an interest rate corridor, as a more stable short-term yield curve could strengthen the policy signal and serve as a reference for developing peso debt instruments and derivatives, lowering transaction costs and enhancing market liquidity. The flexible exchange rate should remain the key mechanism to absorb external shocks . Exchange rate movements since early 2015 helped cushion the downturn and support competitiveness, as neighboring countries experienced similar depreciation pressures. Interventions in the exchange market should be used parsimoniously to counter disorderly market conditions, and not to counter trends driven by fundamentals. The authorities emphasized that monetary policy had been kept tight, and that inflation had declined significantly since mid-2016 . In particular, they noted that across the yield curve, real interest rates had remained strongly positive, including at short maturities. They explained that the monetary policy tightening in the first half of the year reflected a strong response to the rise in inflation and also responded to investors’ shift from pesos into U.S. dollars. In recent months, the BCU had accommodated the reversal in the demand for pesos. The authorities saw the evolution of the exchange rate as the main driver of inflation, and noted that the moderate real wages increases embedded in the new wage agreements, combined with the partial abandon of wage indexation on past inflation, was expected to support the decline in inflation over the coming years. The authorities saw the increased volatility of short-term interest rates as a natural Unless inflation breaches 12 percent in any given month, in which case the correction is immediate. The high degree of wage-price inertia bolsters the case for countering disorderly exchange market conditions, that feed into sustained inflationary pressures. See M. Airaudo, E.F. Buffie, and L-F Zanna, “Inflation Targeting and Exchange Rate Management in Less Developed Countries,” IMF Working Paper 16/55 (2016) on how the combination of currency substitution and strong effects of exchange rate changes on inflation can offer a case for interventions to counter unwarranted exchange rate movements directly, within an inflation targeting regime. Page 24 consequence of the change in operational framework in 2013, and stressed that the BCU was careful to avoid stresses in the market for peso liquidity.