The economic slowdown has bottomed out in 2016 and there are signs that the economy is on an incipient recovery path. Following a decade of expansion, growth came to a near halt in the final quarter of 2015 and first half of 2016, on the back of a difficult environment in the immediate region. The downturn involved a decline in exports, a sharp decline in private and public investment throughout 2015, and continued weak consumption (as rising inflation and exchange rate depreciation eroded current and expected real wages, and regional problems undermined confidence further). The downturn was especially pronounced in manufacturing and construction, while severe floods disrupted agricultural production in April. On the other hand, electricity generation expanded strongly as renewable energy projects came on stream. Confidence and activity rebounded in the third-quarter, buoyed by an appreciating exchange rate and prospects of improvements in Argentina and Brazil. Unemployment peaked at 8.8 percent in July 2016—the highest level since 2008—before trending down, and a negative output gap has opened up, estimated at ½ percent. After weakening further against the U.S. dollar in nominal terms in early 2016, the Uruguayan peso stabilized and reversed course from April through October , broadly in line with regional peers (see Figure 1). Following a 23 percent depreciation in 2015, the peso depreciated by 8 percent against the U.S. dollar between January and March 2016. The weakness of the currency was driven by portfolio capital outflows, both on the asset and the liability side. From May onwards, the currency reversed course, resulting in a 6 percent appreciation in the year through October. The real effective exchange rate depreciated 4.5 percent over the course of 2015, but appreciated by nu = W oo Page 10 6 percent through September 2016. Staff estimates based on the current account model of the EBA indicate that the REER remains in line with fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex 1). After the U.S. elections in November, nominal depreciation pressures reemerged, and Uruguay’s EMBI spread widened. However, they have remained relatively compressed compared to those of regional peers. The current account deficit is expected to remain around 2¼ percent of GDP in 2016 The deficit in 2015 was revised down from 3.5 percent of GDP to 2.3 percent, with a lower income balance (matched by lower FDI and other financial inflows). In 2016, the recession in Argentina and Brazil, and low prices of beef and wheat, have yielded a reduction in merchandise exports, but weak domestic consumption and investment have entailed an offsetting drop in merchandise and services imports. Meanwhile, overall terms of trade developments have been positive, largely due to lower oil prices. Faced with episodes of sharp exchange rate depreciation in early 2016, the central bank intervened in the FX market to support the peso, while purchasing foreign exchange in the face of strong appreciation pressures starting in August. In July, the government successfully launched a dual-tranche reopening of its dollar-denominated bonds maturing in 2027 and 2050, raising U.S.$1.15 billion at historically low spreads (+205bp and +275bp respectively). In all, as of end-November, gross international reserves had fallen by U.S.$1.8 billion during the year-to-date, but remained well above prudential norms. Despite the slowdown in activity, inflation persists at levels above the central bank’s target range . Driven by one-off increases in administered prices, and the further depreciation at the start of 2016, inflation rose to a high of 11 percent (y-o-y) in May, well above the 3–7 percent range (see Box 1). The subsequent weakening of the U.S. dollar has helped bring down inflation to 8.1 percent (y-o-y) in November. With increased administrative prices, and a spike in fruit and vegetable prices, headline inflation exceeded core inflation for the first time since early 2014. Monetary policy remains relatively tight but its transmission has been constrained by the high dollarization and low level of peso credit in Uruguay . Against the background of rising inflation and declining demand for peso liquidity (as the depreciation triggered further currency substitution), the central bank tightened reserve requirements in April 2016 and lowered its reference range for narrow money (M1+) growth. This range was lowered again in July, to 1–3 percent. Short term (one month) interest rates have continued to fluctuate between 11 and 13 percent, after peaking at 15 percent in April. In September, the central bank also stopped its policy of offering the repayment of maturing government securities in U.S. dollars. In April, reserve requirements were raised, leading to their equalization for peso and dollar deposits, at 28 percent, whereas previously requirements were lower for peso deposits than for dollar deposits. lll Y Page 11 Box 1. Uruguay: Explaining the Spike in Inflation Administered prices and exchange-rate pass-through explain most of recent spike in inflation which peaked at 11 percent in May 2016 (y-o-y) before falling to 8.1 percent by November. Increases in administered prices (in particular, one-off increases for electricity and landline telephone services) accounted for roughly half the increase from the low point in February 2015, with a spike in always volatile fruit and vegetable prices and higher tobacco prices in early 2016 explaining the remainder. Administered prices comprise 23 percent of the CPI basket. After a decline to almost zero percent y-o-y in early 2015, inflation in administered prices is now similar to headline inflation again. The recent fall in inflation to below 10 percent, on the other hand, is largely due to the recent appreciation of the Peso against the US dollar. 13 percent of the CPI basket is made up of items which are (at least partly) quoted in dollars. Recent estimates of overall pass-through for Uruguay have been below 10 percent (see IMF, 2016), but for items quoted in U.S. dollars pass-through is fast and around 30 percent. Page 12 Weak credit growth has been the result of tepid demand as well as supply constraints in Uruguay’s segmented financial market. While credit is already among the lowest in the region, at around 30 percent of GDP, real credit growth to both corporates and households has come to a virtual halt since 2015. SME credit, in particular, has been weak, with the real value of new loans contracting by 14 percent in the 12 months to June 2016, relative to a fall of 4 percent for larger corporates (chart). Given that the bulk of deposits are very short-term and U.S. dollar-denominated, banks have limited capacity to extend peso credit, particularly at longer tenors, in order to control balance sheet mismatches (see Box 2). The increase in reserve requirements and slowdown in the economy have exacerbated this trend, with currency substitution reducing banks’ peso liquidity and banks becoming more cautious to maintain the quality of their lending portfolios. In the context of the sharp economic slowdown, fiscal policy has remained broadly neutral during 2016 , after the structural primary balance improved by 0.6 percent of GDP in 2015. The authorities have maintained capital expenditures below the level indicated in the budget, thereby limiting the deficit increase. The public sector deficit is projected to worsen by 0.2 percentage points to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2016. The authorities have reaffirmed their objective to reach a 2.5 percent deficit by 2019, as announced in last year’s five-year budget. In line with this, parliament has approved tax increases and expenditure cuts for 2017, implying a 1 percent of GDP fiscal adjustment. The sixth round of wage negotiations is proceeding largely in line with the government’s guidelines . As of end-November 2016, negotiations for 57 percent of the multi-year wage contracts were completed, with 78 percent of these following the government’s guidelines. In particular, the contracts now stipulate nominal base wage increases that vary with sectoral growth rather than inflation—a key departure from the past. At a constant exchange rate. Both peso and dollar loans deflated using the monthly CPI. See also “Bank Lending and Competition in the Banking Sector,” Selected Issues Paper, IMF Country Report 16/63 (2016). The fiscal accounts cover the central government, nonfinancial public enterprises, and the central bank. Labor Productivity Real Salary Index - Public Real Salary Index - Private Labor Productivity and Real Salaries (Index: 2008 =100) Sources: SEDLAC, BCRU, and IMF staff calculations.Note: Labor productivity refers to real GDP per employed person. Data for employment interpolated using averages in years with no household survey. Page 13 Box 2. Uruguay: Balance Sheet Analysis Uruguay has a small, segmented and highly dollarized but stable financial system. Deposit and credit dollarization (80 and 56 percent, respectively) are structurally high, with the two public banks mainly lending to households in pesos and private banks lending to corporates in dollars (see Lambert and Singh, 2016). Banks are highly liquid and keep their excess dollars either in reserve deposits at the central bank or in high quality assets abroad. Furthermore, banks have only a limited exposure to non-financial public sector (NFPS) debt whereas pension funds are the main holders of local-currency government debt. Foreign currency debt of the NFPS (52 percent of total) is mainly held by non-residents. Overall, the high share of equity in foreign financing (41 percent), the large (gross) international reserves of the central bank (29 percent of GDP), the high liquidity of the banks (liquid FX assets cover 2.5 times non-resident deposits) and the long average maturity of NFPS debt (14 years) contribute to the stability of the system. Pockets of vulnerability exist, however, largely due to the high level of dollarization. In particular, the NFPS and the public sector as a whole have a (small) net short foreign currency position. While banks’ direct FX positions are well hedged, a number of corporate borrowers have net long FX positions, with around 30 percent of dollar lending going to non-tradable sectors. Lastly, households have a large net long FX position due to their preference for saving in dollars, exposing them to a peso appreciation risk. Exchange-rate pass through (notably for durable goods and real estate) provides a natural but only partial hedge. Non-financial private sector Public sector (excluding public banks) Note: Arrows are proportional to the size of the exposure at end-2015. Exposures below USD 100 million are not represented. Exposure in peso Exposure in USD Central bank Non-financial public sector Private banks Public banks Non-bank financial sector (including pension funds) Page 14