Vanuatu is one of the countries in the world most vulnerable to natural disasters The 2015 UN World Risk Index, which measures exposure to natural hazards and the capacity to cope with these events across 171 countries, continues to place Vanuatu at the top of its ranking. Vanuatu’s limited landmass—aggravated by the double insularity of outer islands—and high population and infrastructure densities in coastal areas, make it particularly prone to natural disasters. The cumulative impacts of non-extreme but prolonged weather events, such as the El Niño’s droughts and La Niña’s heavy rainfall put the country further at risk. As a result, Vanuatu’s key economic sectors are disproportionately affected by extreme weather events. The index relates the exposure to natural hazards (earthquakes, cyclones, floods, droughts, and sea level rise) with the likelihood of suffering harm from the disaster and the capacity to reduce its immediate negative consequences (coping capacity) and to establish long-term strategies for societal change (adaptive capacity). See http://www.worldriskreport.org/ and http://www.uni-stuttgart.de/ireus/Internationales/WorldRiskIndex/. Page 12 Natural disasters happen frequently and when they do, they are very costly . The probability of a natural disaster happening in Vanuatu in any given year is 65 percent and more than 99 percent in a five-year period. According to EM-DAT, which provides estimates of human and economic costs by type of disaster, natural disasters caused annual damages equivalent to 2.4 percent of GDP over the 1950-2014 period. Cyclone Pam caused damages estimated at around 35 percent of GDP in physical capital and it affected more than 188,000 inhabitants (in the most affected southern islands, where some 30,000 inhabitants reside, schools and health centers are still being held in temporary facilities provided by UNICEF). The main productive sectors were highly affected, with damages to tourism and transport infrastructure estimated at 11 percent of GDP, and production losses in agriculture and tourism equivalent to 10 percent of GDP. Recovery from Cyclone Pam’s extensive damages has been slower than originally anticipated but reconstruction activities are now picking up steam (Box 1) . Although the immediate response was quite effective in alleviating human suffering and restoring economic activity, some of the procedures put in place on project proposals were burdensome and delayed the implementation of key initiatives. Political instability and capacity constraints likely hindered reconstruction efforts: political unrest limited the disbursement of donors’ grants and, at the same time, the country’s capacity constraints to manage the post-disaster phase deferred actual implementation of reconstruction activities. Staff’s Policy Recommendations Staff welcomes the authorities’ strong commitment to make disaster readiness central to their macroeconomic and development agenda . Responding effectively to natural disaster risk entails different layers of preparedness: Strengthening risk assessment and planning. Lessons from Cyclone Pam show a need to improve on the existing disaster-response plan by making it simpler and more agile, and by establishing a stronger monitoring and evaluation framework. Understanding the main sources of vulnerability and the potential costs linked to extreme weather events is a first step in addressing disaster risk. Building domestic fiscal buffers. Staff recommends incorporating disaster costs into national budget planning and making the Response Fund, an ex post provision made when an emergency is declared, a more proactive rather than reactive instrument. The The EM-DAT database covers natural disasters that meet at least one of the following criteria: (i) 10 or more people reported killed; (ii) 100 or more people reported affected; (iii) a declaration of a state of emergency; or (iv) a call for international assistance. See http://www.emdat.be/. Staff calculations suggest that the impact on underlying growth is modest, at around 0.12 percent per annum. Medium-term growth projections of 3 percent (around ¾ percent in per capita terms) reflect this as well as the positive impact from prospective infrastructure investments. Medium-term spending projections include an implicit small annual provision for disaster relief. Estimates are based on Vanuatu’s Post-Disaster Needs Assessment led by the government. Page 13 introduction of a corporate and personal income tax is an opportunity to constitute an additional buffer. Securing external buffers. The authorities should complement domestic buffers with externally financed instruments, such as contingent credit lines with multilateral partners. Also, the existing strong engagement with key donors, whose financial support in the aftermath of Cyclone Pam had an immediate humanitarian and economic impact, must continue and be further enhanced. Promoting resilient infrastructure and adequate maintenance. Although more expensive, investing in adaptation (either infrastructure such as seawalls, breakwater reefs, that can withstand stronger weather events; or through relocating key infrastructure and conducting disaster mapping) can have positive spillovers. Ensuring the maintenance of critical infrastructure is adequately funded and part of a medium-term expenditure framework is critical (e.g., stable allocations for the Infrastructure Maintenance Fund, and including donor support). Authorities’ Views The authorities welcomed staff’s detailed assessment of the experience with Cyclone Pam and stressed that response delays in the early months were in part due to development partners’ process requirements Coordinating the support offered by donors and civil society organizations posed additional managerial challenges, with competing requests, deadlines, and procedures. Although cumbersome, the authorities acknowledged that some of the early hurdles faced helped improve the ultimate allocation of funds to more productive uses. The authorities are committed to simplify and improve the Recovery Plan established in August The authorities argued that while enhancing domestic buffers to combat natural disasters must be a policy priority, in practice it is challenging to implement given other competing needs. In particular, the authorities highlighted that the funding needed to pursue their development agenda, notably via infrastructure investments, is likely to make preparedness to natural disasters a more challenging task. They reiterated the need for external buffers through continued support by donors and development partners. The authorities agreed with the need for additional provisions related to infrastructure maintenance . The budget for operation and maintenance of infrastructure was increased by Vt200 million in 2016 (0.25 percent of GDP) and an Infrastructure Maintenance Fund is being set up with an expected budget of Vt1 billion by 2020 (about 1 percent of GDP). Page 14 Box 1. Vanuatu: Lessons from Cyclone Pam Eighteen months after Cyclone Pam struck Vanuatu, the economy continues to recover from the cyclone’s extensive damages. With the benefit of hindsight, we draw some lessons from the experience. Institutions Although the immediate response was effective, the recovery and reconstruction plan was overly complex with some coordination issues with development partners . Since 2013, Vanuatu has a Ministry dealing exclusively with climate change issues, which houses the National Disaster Management Office (NDMO) in charge of coordinating preparedness and recovery initiatives. Thanks to a cluster system in place (spanning water and sanitation, education, agriculture, to name a few) the immediate response was quite effective in alleviating human suffering, ensuring the population’s access to food items and shelters. The medium- to long-term recovery is coordinated by the Prime Minister’s Office. The government established a Recovery Committee in August 2015 to coordinate reconstruction efforts. Composed by high-level officials, the committee in charge of reviewing project proposals and allocating funds lacked a dedicated technical unit. Some of the procedures put in place were burdensome and delayed the implementation of key initiatives even if these might have improved the ultimate allocation of funds. Immediate response Reconstruction activities Response High Low-Medium Fiscal buffers Fiscal buffers were very limited . The authorities had established two domestic financing mechanisms in response to natural disasters. Managed by the Ministry of Finance, the Emergency Fund has an allocation of Vt25 million (about USD230,000) and the Response Fund can provide up to 1.5 percent of the government’s budget for that particular fiscal year (about USD2.5 million or 0.3 percent of GDP). The government spent in total Vt390 million with Pam-related relief and recovery in 2015 (about USD3.6 million or 0.5 percent of GDP), with additional resources diverted from other priority programs. The Response Fund, which is only triggered in case of a major natural disaster, cannot adequately facilitate the large needs from such an extreme event. Given the frequent recurrence of environmental events in Vanuatu, the authorities could consider establishing a preemptive fund that would reduce the fiscal pressures from higher frequency and lower intensity events, for example, by providing funding for resilient infrastructure and adaptation activities. Fiscal buffers Response Low Donor financing Financial assistance, in particular from bilateral partners, was swift and sizeable though disbursements are low . In the aftermath of Cyclone Pam, development partners contributed significant amounts of aid-in-kind, grants, and loans for immediate support and medium-term reconstruction-related projects. The IMF’s financial assistance via RCF/RFI of about USD23.8 million for balance of payments needs played a key role in catalyzing critical donor support and was the first to be disbursed among IFIs. The World Bank committed USD50 million and the Asian Development Bank USD22 million for the reconstruction of roads, schools, and public buildings. At the bilateral level, the more significant contributions were AUD15 million for immediate response and AUD35 for recovery from Australia, NZD3.5 million for immediate response and NZD6 million for recovery from New Zealand, and EUR10.5 million from the E.U. While about USD72 million in grants were received in 2015 and disbursements are picking up in 2016, absorption capacity is being stretched. Bilateral partners commitments and disbursements Multilateral partners commitments and disbursements Response High Medium Page 15 Insurance Box 1. Vanuatu: Lessons from Cyclone Pam (continued) Although timely, insurance was not sufficient to cover major disasters . Vanuatu received USD1.9 million from the Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Financial Insurance (PCRFI). While the authorities acknowledged the fast disbursement, the payout was insignificant (covering less than 1 percent of damages) for meeting the needs resulting from Cyclone Pam. Private sector insurance, primarily available to large and established businesses (resorts, in particular) and in urban areas, covered Vt5.7 billion of Pam-related damages (or about USD52 million). Despite the adequate payout, there is a risk that insurance premia may rise in the future. Response/ Magnitude Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Financial Insurance (PCRFI) High/Low Private sector insurance payouts Medium/High Social safety net The authorities’ response supported households’ reconstruction needs . The government suspended VAT and import duties on construction materials for two months after the cyclone, deferred the payments of vehicle registration fees and VAT payments to the next quarter, and provided subsidies for agricultural seedlings to affected households. The Vanuatu National Provident Fund (VNPF) allowed its 40,000 active members (mostly civil servants) to withdraw up to 20 percent of their retirement savings to cover expenses related to Cyclone Pam, with total withdrawals amounting to Vt1.7 billion (2.1 percent of GDP) for three months following the disaster. The VNPF was able to withdraw Vt2.1 billion in the domestic banking sector to fund its members’ needs, with limited financial impact on its books. While the most considerable damages were recorded in the southern islands of Vanuatu, most VNPF members are located in the three major (and less affected) islands—limiting the reach of the policy. Monetary policy Social safety nets Response High The RBV’s comfortable level of reserves helped alleviate liquidity constraints . The RBV’s policy helped smooth the impact of Cyclone Pam with measures facilitating the financial sector’s access to liquidity and supporting the government’s rehabilitation efforts. The RBV took swift action and agreed to tie its policy rate to the 91-day RBV Note (variable) rate, which implied a decrease from 5.25 percent to about 1.85 percent, and to reduce the Statutory Reserve Deposit (SRD) requirement, which comprises reserve deposits of commercial banks held as reserves at the RBV, from 7 to 5 percent. Additional measures were taken, including the activation of an additional credit facility for commercial banks, an interest rate decrease on the RBV’s Secured Advance Facility and the inclusion of SRD holdings as eligible collateral as well as the provision of financial assistance relief of Vt40 million to the government and provinces. Monetary policy Response High Banking sector Banks fostered the continuity of the payments system with well-targeted business continuity plans . Banks implemented their business continuity plan to ensure most households and businesses had enough physical currency to proceed with their daily activities when banks were closed, ATM machines were down, and the only means of payment available was notes and coins. The largest food and petrol retailers were visited twice daily to facilitate cash holdings and deposits. A few days after the cyclone hit, banks provided an immediate waiver on their retail customers’ loan repayments for 2 to 3 months. Banks also delayed loan repayments for 6 to 12 months to some corporate customers pending an insurance payout and provided additional lending to commence repair Page 16 Box 1. Vanuatu: Lessons from Cyclone Pam (concluded) work. The impact on arrears and non-performing loans (NPLs) was not significant, but a few banks seized the opportunity to clear their books and write off several NPLs. Banking sector Response High Communications and energy Early warning systems were instrumental . The authorities sent early warning messages through radio and mobile phones, which helped reach communities prior to the cyclone. Telecommunication services were restored a few days after the cyclone, once electricity was reestablished (3 days after for hospitals and major services, and 95 percent of the service was restored after 4 weeks in Efate island and after 8 weeks in Tanna island). Damages were assumed by the government but the pass-through to consumers was limited (electricity prices are regulated by the government and updated monthly). The price of fuel dropped Vt10 per liter on all products a month after the cyclone. Key services to the real sector Response Medium __ ____ Prepared by Ricardo Marto (RES). Response ratings are staff’s normative assessment where “Low” means insufficient, “High” means sufficient and “Medium” means somewhere in the middle range between “Low” and “High”.