Vanuatu is coping with the consequences of Cyclone Pam that hit the country on March 13 . Together with previously planned infrastructure investment spending, this is expected to increase both public and external debt in relation to GDP. The damage from Cyclone Pam will have a significant short-term effect on growth as important sectors of the economy including agriculture and tourism have been impaired. GDP is expected to contract by 2 percent in 2015, in contrast to the pre-cyclone forecast of 3.5 percent growth. The investment projects are expected to foster growth in the future as they aim to build and modernize the country’s infrastructure. However, concerns regarding the efficiency of investment, implementation capacity, and resulting debt burden suggest a prudent approach. The needs for post-cyclone reconstruction are large and will require external assistance to fill the financing gap. In line with the preliminary Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), the recovery and reconstruction expenditures on the part of the public sector are expected on the scale of 20 percent of GDP spread over 3 years. Taking into account the estimated loss of revenue and grants committed so far, the fiscal deficit is projected to reach about 12 percent of GDP in 2015–16 and 10 percent in 2017. About 6 percent of GDP per year will be financed by project-related concessional loans. This leaves a financing gap of about 15 percent of GDP over 2015–17. In the absence of specific commitment of grants from development partners for reconstruction, the baseline scenario assumes that the gap will be filled with concessional loans. In 2014, the face values of external public and total external debt were low and declined from the 2013 levels in relation to GDP. The external public debt was estimated at 11.7 percent of GDP while total external debt stood at 22.5 percent of GDP. However, the total public and publicly guaranteed debt increased to 24 percent of GDP owing to increases in both domestic debt by the central government and the government-guaranteed debt extended to Government Business Enterprises (GBEs). Due to data limitations, external liabilities of commercial banks are used as a proxy for private external debt. At the end of 2014 domestic debt of the central government stood at 7.8 percent of GDP. It constituted 40 percent of total central government debt and consisted of government The Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) estimated the total damage and losses to the economy caused by Cyclone Pam at 61 percent of GDP, of which the damage to physical assets accounts for 37 percent of GDP and production losses account for 24 percent of GDP. The highest levels of damage were to the housing stock (32 percent of total damage), the tourism sector (20 percent), the education sector (13 percent), and the transport sector (10 percent). As for production losses, agriculture and tourism are expected to sustain the largest levels at 33 and 26 percent of the total, respectively. Sixty nine percent of the impact falls within private enterprises and individual ownership, while the remaining 31 percent is in the public sector. Government-guaranteed GBE debt amounted to 4.6 percent of GDP at end-2014. All GBE debt is domestic, although some of it is owed to foreign-owned banks and is denominated in foreign currency. Comprehensive information on non-guaranteed GBE debt is not available. Page 71 bonds placed with the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, commercial banks and other financial institutions (primarily the Vanuatu National Provident Fund). Most of Vanuatu’s external debt is concessional . It has been contracted from multilateral lenders (ADB, EIB, and IDA) and via bilateral agreements (China Ex-Im Bank). The interest rates on debt are fairly low and loan maturities are long. This is reflected in a relatively high grant element of the debt and a low debt service, even though the degree of concessionality varies considerably by lender. UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS The DSA is produced using updated data provided by the authorities and estimates from IMF and World Bank staff. The impact of Cyclone Pam on the economy is drawn from the PDNA estimates. The DSA framework uses a discount rate of 5 percent. Total public debt includes central government debt, publicly guaranteed GBE debt, and RCF/RFI on the books of the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu. Major infrastructure projects are assumed to proceed as planned, although at a more protracted implementation schedule. Despite the unexpected economic disruption caused by the cyclone, the government intends to proceed with previously planned scaling-up of public infrastructure investment. In line with past experience and limited implementation capacity, the DSA assumes a somewhat lower rate of project implementation than envisaged by the government. Public capital expenditures are estimated to peak at 12.2 percent of GDP in 2016 and decline to a historic norm of about 2.3 percent of GDP in 2021. After the current plans are implemented, project borrowing is assumed to fall to the historical level of about 1 percent of GDP, setting the public debt ratio on a declining path. Key assumptions underlying the baseline DSA are consistent with the post-cyclone scenario for the macroeconomic framework developed during the 2015 mission (Box 1). Differences