Upgrading Vanuatu’s ongoing development strategy pays particular attention to poverty and inclusion A recent study by the World Bank finds that poverty is widespread in most Pacific islands with many households living in deprived conditions. To eliminate absolute poverty and achieve shared prosperity in Vanuatu, in accordance with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 and 2, three key conditions must be in place: higher growth, employment and financial services, and a resilient social safety net against external shocks. Key deficiencies identified by the FATF’s latest assessment can be found here: http://www.fatf- gafi.org/publications/high-riskandnon-cooperativejurisdictions/documents/fatf-compliance-june-2016.html. “Growing Challenges,” East Asia and Pacific Outlook (World Bank, April 2016). DG po ve ec ti ve oa ov er er ere bu il ili ce poo ho vu it ti on du ce xpo vu ilit -r ec ono nv on ho oa hun er ec ov ag re ood odu ti on ili lt ac ti ce ea odu ti it odu ti on ec ng ca ac it ti on ng ea ough ood ng og ov il qu lit Sou ce UN “ ng W op ” Page 25 Improving access to employment opportunities and to basic social services is a priority, especially in the outer islands . Enhancing the educational attainment and skills of the poor deserve particular emphasis (Table 7). The ability to access external labor markets is a window of opportunity for poverty reduction and inclusion. Several PICs, including Vanuatu, have had labor mobility agreements with Australia, New Zealand, or the United States. Expanding these agreements will prove critical in addressing the country’s unemployment challenges. Seasonal workers in Australia and New Zealand have increased, raising their living standards and those of their families at home. However, workers could be marketed more effectively and their skills enhanced with appropriate training policies. A recent study by the World Bank is assessing potential benefits for Vanuatu and other PICs from modifying existing labor migration policies by both sending and receiving countries (Appendix VII). The authorities are making efforts to promote financial inclusion, but meeting lending needs by many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) remains challenging The National Bank of Vanuatu (NBV), the only domestic bank in Vanuatu, has played an important role in providing financial services to the outer islands, including via microfinance and financial literacy education programs. NBV recorded a 35 percent growth of microfinance lending in 2015 after introducing the Rural Land and Seasonal Labour Loans to rural residents and seasonal workers. The financial literacy education program was also very successful in helping open bank accounts in rural areas. Credit unions have played a complementary role in providing financial services to rural residents unable to access banking services. Nonetheless, many SMEs still find it challenging to obtain credit because of stringent collateral requirements, suggesting that there exists ample room for further financial development (Figure 5). Quality upgrading and diversification are expected to play a critical role in promoting inclusive growth Improvements in connectivity—thanks to the recently completed submarine cable connection, planned investments in transport infrastructure, and lower fuel prices—are attracting more and higher quality tourism. Exploring niche markets and tapping on Vanuatu’s agricultural resources as in input for the tourism industry—agrotourism—will be beneficial for poverty reduction and inclusion. Efforts to increase agricultural production, including beef production, provide diversification in domestic activities that can serve the economy well and provide an additional buffer against external shocks. Improving the ease of doing business is an important complement in promoting quality upgrading and diversification . Enhanced competition would help address the high cost of doing business in Vanuatu that hinders entry into new lines of economic activity, which in turn limits opportunities for quality upgrading and productivity boosts. There is room to improve the country’s standing on the ease of starting a business, registering property, or land titling. The “Sustaining Long-Run Growth and Macroeconomic Stability in Low-Income Countries – The Role of Structural Transformation and Diversification,” (IMF, March 2014). Vanuatu ranks 94 (of 189) in the WB’s Ease of Doing Business index. Page 26 recent reforms to the leasing regime for customary land have caused unexpected delays in the process of registering land due to some inefficient procedures aimed at improving transparency. Staff’s Policy Recommendations Staff encourages the authorities’ efforts to bolster inclusive growth and emphasizes the following Poverty alleviation. Particular emphasis should be placed on preparing the vulnerable populations for the recurrence of climatic events. The authorities’ commitment to incorporate these efforts in the new medium-term development strategy is very welcome. Financial inclusion Staff analytical work shows a strong link between financial deepening and growth. Therefore, increasing private access to finance should continue to be an important priority in Vanuatu’s development strategy. At the same time, the authorities need to secure the soundness of non-bank financial institutions, which play a crucial role in promoting financial inclusion especially in the outer islands. Quality upgrading. Staff commends the authorities’ efforts to improve quality upgrading in the agricultural sector, which accounts for about 70 percent of the labor force. New initiatives by bilateral and multilateral donors to expand opportunities in the agricultural sector is an encouraging step towards this direction. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with staff’s view on the importance of financial inclusion for the long-term development of the country. They expressed their intention to continue their efforts in promoting access to financial services in rural areas. The authorities concurred with the staff’s recommendations on poverty reduction, diversification, and quality upgrading . They noted ongoing efforts to introduce structural competitiveness measures to reduce the cost of doing business in Vanuatu. The authorities reinforced the intention of promoting more economic activities in the outer islands, with a particular focus on agricultural production supported by development partners. The authorities also agreed to improve the business environment by removing key bottlenecks and focusing on complementary structural competitiveness measures to stimulate private investment. J cc K L pu Č á Page 27