and Debt Sustainability In 2015, the government budget recorded an unexpectedly large surplus of 7.2 percent of GDP due to unspent cyclone-related grants received from the international community . In addition, duties’ collection improved considerably thanks to increased imports. As a result, domestic revenue was stable, broadly unaffected by the government’s decision to suspend VAT on construction materials in the aftermath of Cyclone Pam. Government expenses rose to 23.6 percent of GDP due to immediate relief needs and early election expenses (Table 2). Capacity constraints and political uncertainties kept reconstruction spending and public investment low in 2015. However, in 2016, the fiscal balance is projected to record deficits of about 10 percent of GDP due to large cyclone-related current and capital spending, and overdue severance payments . The government expects domestic revenue to increase by 2.3 percent compared to the 2015 budget (19.2 percent of GDP), supported by receipts from the Citizenship Program and the recently established Vanuatu Economic Rehabilitation Program (launched in late 2015). Non-donor-related expenses were initially projected at 19.2 percent of GDP, as provisions for Cyclone Pam’s recovery activities were accounted for. However, a supplementary budget of 1.6 percent of GDP was passed in July to fulfill part of the overdue severance payments to civil servants (2.6 percent of GDP). Capital expenditure is projected to rise sharply Page 17 starting this year on account of the country’s ambitious infrastructure scale up. Although much of the spending is financed by grants, external concessional loans, and deposits, long-term domestic bonds (1.4 percent of GDP) were issued to close the financing gap. Major infrastructure projects, including the building of international wharfs and inter-island shipping facilities, roads, schools, and health centers, have recently started or are in the pipeline . The 2016 budget reported these projects for a combined value of 57 percent of the country’s 2015 GDP spread over the next 7 years, with the bulk of the construction to be undertaken during the 2016-18 period. Five major infrastructure projects started and will be implemented over the next few years. In addition, agreements have been signed with the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank to finance, through grants and loans, the reconstruction of schools and roads damaged by Cyclone Pam. The ambitious infrastructure investment program will be partly financed through external borrowing, raising central government debt sharply to 33.5 percent of GDP in 2016 and higher over the medium term . The significant increase of public debt in 2016 is mainly due to the rise in spending related to reconstruction and infrastructure projects and the clearing of significant past due government legal commitments. With two domestic issuances so far in 2016, government debt outstanding held by domestic financial institutions was raised by 18.2 percent from end-2015 level. The RBV’s recent purchase of a Vt1.1 billion 10 year-maturity bond has pushed its credit to the government to the limit. While the new external debt is highly concessional, repayment obligations may put pressure on fiscal accounts as debt service is projected to reach USD18 million by 2020. An updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) suggests that Vanuatu continues to face a moderate risk of debt distress , a move-up from the low rating in 2013 due to post- Cyclone Pam reconstruction and planned infrastructure projects. While the evolution of debt indicators remains similar to that obtained in the 2015 DSA, the sizeable infrastructure projects pose threats to debt and fiscal sustainability when grants and concessional financing are delayed or become insufficient to cover the investment program. A model-based analysis reaffirms the need for a concerted effort with the private sector and international financial institutions to more clearly advocate for careful selection of projects and the need to develop contingency plans in case expected returns do not materialize, and that financing at concessional terms—in particular through grants—is available (Appendix III). In addition, another extreme weather event in the medium term is likely to raise the country’s risk of debt distress, which further reinforces the need to rely on grant financing. Repeated large-scale borrowing to rebuild from disasters is not a viable long-term strategy and more emphasis is needed on risk reduction investments. iji K L Total Public Debt, 2015 (In percent of GDP) Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Estimates. Page 18 Revenue mobilization, including by launching an income tax, is essential to finance the country’s development and create fiscal buffers . Government revenues are low by regional standards and unlike other PICs Vanuatu does not have a personal or corporate income tax. The government has committed to launching a comprehensive tax reform to improve revenue collection, while maintaining a competitive business environment (Appendix IV). The tax reform initiative includes the introduction of personal and corporate income tax by 2018, which would generate additional revenue of about 1 percent of GDP. A Tax Review Committee, supported by a AusAid-funded resident tax advisor, was formed within the Ministry of Economic Development and Finance and is expected to start the consultation process with the public soon. Government Business Enterprises (GBEs) continue to operate under unclear regulatory framework raising concerns for their transparency and effectiveness. They represent a significant ongoing fiscal cost to the government including by adding burden to public debt––government-guaranteed GBE debt amounted to 4.6 percent of GDP at the end of 2015). In comparison with other small island economies the performance of Vanuatu GBEs does not fare well (Appendix V). The authorities are working closely with ADB to assess their financial situation and to improve governance. Staff’s Policy Recommendations Staff welcomes the authorities’ tax reform initiatives, which are expected to raise tax revenue, but securing debt sustainability will require efforts in several respects Slowing down debt accumulation. With public debt ratios rising sharply in the next few years, staff urges the authorities to exercise restraint in contracting additional borrowing in the near future, which would risk debt distress. Therefore, a clear policy priority for the authorities is to set the debt-to-GDP ratios on a declining path by 2021 and seek grant financing for the majority of any additional development projects. Staff sees the need for a concerted effort with the private sector and international financial institutions to ensure the public investment program yields the expected returns and that financing at concessional terms—in particular through grants—is available. Exercising fiscal discipline. Fiscal pressures are compounded by reconstruction efforts and the authorities’ ambitious infrastructure investment agenda. At this critical juncture,