The financial sector has recovered well from the adverse impact of the cyclone, but vigilance is still needed . Since the last quarter of 2015 financial soundness of banks, weakened after the cyclone, has been improving with the rise of capital and liquid asset ratios, and the decline of the ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs). Nonetheless, the longer-term financial soundness of banks has been on a deteriorating trend since 2010 (Figure 4 and Table 6). The recent improvement of the banking sector’s capital and liquidity position is attributed to the RBV’s accommodative stance in the aftermath of the cyclone, lowering the Statutory Reserve Deposit (SRD) requirement and the Liquid Asset Requirement (LAR) to alleviate potential liquidity pressures on banks. The non-bank financial sector remains, on the other hand, small and not sufficiently supervised. Despite a swift recovery of the payments system the role of banking sector in the post-cyclone recovery has remained somewhat limited . The growth of corporate lending has declined during the post-cyclone recovery period even though liquidity has been plentiful (Figure L L q Page 23 4 and Table 3). Large interest rate spreads and high lending rates have persisted even after the RBV’s lowering of the rediscount rate. The authorities are taking steps to address shortcomings regarding anti-money laundering and the countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) . Vanuatu was included in the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) gray list in February 2016 after the authorities agreed to an action plan to address significant AML/CFT deficiencies. Several measures, including amendments to the legal framework on AML/CFT and the international companies sector are being pursued. Though the loss of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs) has not emerged as a serious issue in Vanuatu, the inclusion in the FATF list and the selloff of Westpac (Australian bank) to PNG’s Bank South Pacific in July 2016 may pose some difficulties in cross-border payments, trade finance, and remittances. The cost of transferring funds to Vanuatu has been trending up since 2014 and is substantially higher than in other PICs. Staff’s Policy Recommendations The RBV must take action to secure financial stability by gradually normalizing regulatory requirements for the banking and non-bank financial sectors . First, the RBV needs to undertake a diagnostic assessment of banks’ financial situation to be prepared for the risks stemming from potential tightening of reserve and liquid asset requirements. Staff also recommends PFTAC’s assistance in reviewing a current credit union act and drafting the amendments to ensure the effectiveness of supervision on credit unions and to promote credit unions’ role in financial inclusion. According to staff analysis, large interest rate spreads, which are commonly observed in PICs, result from high cost and high risk of credit potentially arising from small scale, vulnerability to shocks, and geographic dispersion in the region (Jamaludin, Klyuev, and Serechetapongse, IMF WP/15/96 ). (continued) K iji L L tt W W iji tt W tt W Page 24 Staff welcomes the authorities’ recent initiatives to resolve the AML/CFT issue and encourage them to seek further international support Vanuatu needs to accelerate the implementation of the AML/CFT action plan and ensure its legal framework is in line with international standards (e.g., secrecy obligations, bearer shares and share warrants, and transparency of beneficial ownership information of offshore companies and trusts). Several partners have expressed interest in supporting the authorities on this issue. Benefiting from Papua New Guinea and Australia’s collaboration, the authorities should leverage this support to make bold steps to ensure its exit from the FATF monitoring. Authorities’ Views The authorities emphasized that the RBV’s prompt policy response after the cyclone significantly enhanced overall bank liquidity in the domestic financial system . They further acknowledged that caution is needed to ensure financial stability with the tightening of reserve and liquid asset requirements when deemed appropriate. The authorities are proceeding with AML regulations and expect a steady implementation of the action plan put in place in line with international standards. In addition to FATF and the Asia-Pacific Group support, the authorities are engaging with other development partners for technical and legal support, and are committed to enhancing the overall effectiveness of the AML/CFT regime.