Cyclone Pam. A devastating cyclone struck Vanuatu on March 13, leaving in its wake massive destruction and loss of life (Box 1). The Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) estimated the damage to physical assets at 29.3 billion vatu (36.7 percent of the 2014 GDP) and production losses at 19.3 billion vatu (24.2 percent of GDP), for a combined 60.8 percent of GDP. Context . Due to prudent macroeconomic policies in the years before the cyclone, Vanuatu had moderate public debt, adequate reserves, and low inflation. At the same time, growth has been disappointingly low over the last 5 years. The previous government sought to reinvigorate the economy through an ambitious program of infrastructure investment, much of it debt- financed. However, many projects faced considerable delays, and the government lost a no confidence vote in May 2014, partly because of a controversial public-private airport expansion deal that would have created a substantial contingent liability. The new government canceled the deal and professed commitment to fiscal prudence in line with staff advice (Appendix II). At the same time, it has kept public investment plans largely unchanged. Pre-cyclone economic developments . Real GDP rose 2.3 percent in 2014—a slight acceleration from the 2013 pace of 2.0 percent. Agricultural production and exports boomed in response to rising prices of copra, coconut oil, kava, and beef, but tourist arrivals declined from the 2013 peak, reflecting a slowdown in the Australian economy, Australian dollar weakness, and a reduction in tourism promotion. Public infrastructure projects—which had been expected to boost growth—were slow to get off the ground, but a submarine cable connection completed in January 2014 spurred growth in the ICT sector. Inflation dropped to 1 percent due to a deceleration in the prices of food and household and electronic items. The current account balance recorded a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP after a deficit in the previous year on account of an improvement in the terms of trade and increased official transfers. The basket-pegged vatu depreciated against the U.S. dollar but appreciated against the Australian dollar over the course of 2014. The fiscal balance strengthened to a surplus of 1 percent of GDP, reflecting improved tax compliance, high proceeds from “commercial diplomacy” programs (Appendix III), and underspending on grant-financed development projects. Samoa Papua New GuineaFiji Solomon IslandsTonga Source: APD LISC. Government Debt and International Reserves, 2014 R ( f oo ) Governmentdebt Page 10