Recent economic developments are marked by the damages of Cyclone Pam, the political turmoil that ensued, and the recovery process . Real GDP growth is estimated to have accelerated from 2 percent in 2013 to 2.3 percent in 2014 with the commencement of several infrastructure investment projects (Figure 1 and Table 1). However, the impact of the cyclone induced an estimated decline in real GDP of 0.8 percent in 2015. Inflation had been low and stable prior to the cyclone, dipping below 1 percent due to falling oil prices and service-related items. Cyclone-induced shortages, reconstruction activity, and infrastructure projects pushed it up to 2.5 percent in 2015. The current account deficit widened to 11 percent of GDP in 2015 from an average of 3 percent of GDP in the three years before, with imports increasing sharply on account of reconstruction efforts and exports depressed due to severe damages to tourism facilities and agricultural production (Figure 2 and Table 4). The deficit was comfortably financed by grants, borrowing, and foreign direct investment (FDI). Foreign reserves rose to USD273 million (7.1 months of imports) by end-2015, with reserves excluding Pam-related grants and loans at about USD215 million (5.6 months of imports). The fiscal balance recorded a surplus of about 7 percent in 2015 due to cyclone-related grants received that remained unspent during the fiscal year (Figure 3 and Table 2). The outlook for Vanuatu is favorable owing to the momentum around reconstruction activities and infrastructure investments . A recovery in tourism and agriculture combined with further ramping-up of infrastructure projects is expected to propel real GDP growth to 4 percent in 2016 and 4.5 percent in 2017 (Table 5). Inflation is projected to remain below 3 percent in 2017 owing to low commodity prices, even though expanding domestic demand will provide some upward pressure. The current account deficit is projected to widen to around 20 percent of GDP in 2016 and 2017 due to cyclone-related spending and the high import content of the major infrastructure projects. This deficit is envisaged to be financed by donor grants and loans, and foreign direct investment. Fiscal accounts are likely to record large deficits (above 10 percent of GDP) in 2016 and 2017 due to the rise in spending related to reconstruction and infrastructure projects, and the clearing of past due legal commitments. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside with recurring environmental shocks posing a constant threat . The largest uncertainty is the rate of implementation of public infrastructure projects, while the pace of the recovery—in particular, in tourism activities and agriculture—is difficult to predict (Appendix I). The scale and pace of reconstruction efforts may fall short of needs if external financing is not sufficient or if implementation capacity disappoints. On the external front, weaker-than-expected growth in emerging and advanced economies would have a direct impact on Vanuatu’s agricultural sector via weaker commodity prices and a knock-on effect on tourism via a slowdown in Australia. A persistent appreciation of the vatu against the Australian dollar—despite an offsetting depreciation against the U.S. dollar—would reduce the attractiveness of Vanuatu as a tourist destination for Australians and lower the real Page 11 value of Australian aid. The danger of natural disasters is ever-present, aggravated by the cyclical effects of El Niño’s droughts and La Niña’s heavy rainfall. Sources of Risk Likelihood Impact Downside 1. Weaker-than-expected global growth slowdown 2. Sharp rise in risk premia with flight to safety (US dollar appreciation) 3. Natural disasters and climate change 4. Delays in implementation of infrastructure projects Medium Medium High High Medium Medium High High Source: Staff assessment Authorities’ Views The authorities concurred with the staff’s assessment but saw stronger GDP growth over the medium term In light of the positive economic momentum generated by the stable political environment of the last few months, the authorities are expecting a steadfast implementation of major infrastructure projects. They also noted that spillover effects of the construction boom to other sectors could further boost real GDP growth over the next few years.