Balance-of-payments need . Even before the cyclone, Vanuatu’s current account was expected to record a significant deficit, as an increase in project- related imports would outweigh the impact of lower oil prices. Now with severe damage to tourism facilities and agriculture, Vanuatu’s exports are expected to be depressed this year, while imports will be boosted further on account of the reconstruction effort. Humanitarian response has been swift, but existing pledges of aid (about US$50 million) are much smaller than preliminary damage estimates. As a result, the current account deficit is projected to be 27 percent of GDP, compared with 8 percent in the pre-cyclone baseline. Insurance payments and foreign direct investment are expected to cover a relatively small part of the shortfall. Without additional external financing, international reserves would decline to US$87 million (1.8 months of imports) by the end of 2015. Such levels would clearly be inadequate, particularly for a country subject to large and frequent shocks. Even if the fiscal gap (see the next section) is fully covered with external grants and loans, reserves would still be expected to decline to 2.7 months of imports. Request for Fund assistance In view of the urgent balance-of- payments need, the authorities have requested IMF emergency assistance in the amount of SDR17 million (100 percent of the quota). The assistance would be provided in equal shares as a one-off disbursement under the shocks window of the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) and a one-off purchase under the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI), both of which provide an appropriate response to the Vanuatu’s imports of petroleum products equaled 7.2 percent of GDP in 2014. US$1.9 million has been received from the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot. Private claims are still being assessed. Government property was not insured. In millions of U.S. dollars23.5In percent of financing gap18.6In percent of recovery needs7.1 Rapid Credit Facility/Rapid Financing Instrument (RCF/RFI) Pre-CyclonePost-Cyclone20152015 Current account balance Exports of goods (f.o.b.) Imports of goods (f.o.b.) Services balance Cyclone-related humanitarian aid and grants Insurance receipt Capital and financial account Foreign direct investment Overall balance Financing: Change in international reserves (-, increase) IMF's RCF/RFI Financing gap Memorandum items, assuming financing gap is closed: Gross international reserves Without RCF/RFI With RCF/RFI In months of prospective imports Without RCF/RFI With RCF/RFI 1/ The gap is expected to be closed by donors considering support in light of the recently finalized PDNA.Source: IMF staff estimates. Balance of Payments Impact (in US$ million, unless otherwise indicated) Difference Page 14 immediate economic, social, and humanitarian needs of Vanuatu. The RCF/RFI financing would increase the reserve cushion to 3.2 months of imports at end-2015. This cushion is still too low given high uncertainty about balance-of-payments flows this year, and the government continues to seek additional external support with the RCF/RFI playing a catalytic role. Vanuatu has adequate capacity to repay the Fund as the bulk of its public debt is concessional and the debt service is low relative to projected export earnings and foreign reserves. With the RCF/RFI, Vanuatu’s repayments to the Fund are projected to peak in 2019 at a low level of 0.6 percent of GDP, or 1.2 percent of exports of goods and services (See Table 9 on Capacity to Repay the Fund). Policy commitments . The authorities are committed to implementing sound policies to ensure macroeconomic stability and inclusive growth. As outlined in the Letter of Intent (Annex I), the authorities’ agenda is broadly in line with staff’s recommendations presented in this report (see below). Staff believes that the RCF/RFI will help achieve stable macroeconomic conditions and encourage development partners to be more forthcoming in their assistance. The authorities welcome a safeguards assessment as an opportunity to strengthen the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu’s (RBV) governance and control framework.