Vietnam’s economy has experienced solid growth with low inflation, reflecting policy attention to maintaining macroeconomic stability . Excellent progress has been made in achieving Millennium Development Goals and Vietnam’s openness to trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) has been an engine for growth of increasingly sophisticated exports to diversified markets. Entrenching these achievements and strengthening resilience in an uncertain and potentially volatile global environment will, however, require important policy upgrades to tackle legacy risks and emerging challenges. Public debt is high, external debt has increased, and rapid credit expansion poses a risk to financial stability while adequate bank recapitalization to deal with impaired assets has yet to materialize. Structural reforms, including for state-owned enterprises, are needed to strengthen the spillover of productivity gains in the foreign-invested sector to the domestic economy. The January 2016 Party Congress has been accompanied by a renewed reform drive . A new government was formed in April, three months ahead of the traditional schedule, reflecting the authorities’ desire to begin implementing their economic policy reform agenda without delay. In addition to reaffirming the importance of maintaining macroeconomic stability, emphasis has been placed on increasing use of market-based mechanisms for economic reforms. This reenergized push provides an excellent opportunity to tackle key issues in a second generation of reforms that would place Vietnam in a position to take full advantage of its potential and recent trade agreements to become one of Asia’s most successful and dynamic economies. Policies have been broadly in line with past Fund advice, although implementation in some key areas has lagged . A more flexible mechanism for setting the daily central exchange rate was introduced, monetary policy is increasingly focusing on inflation stability as a key objective, and the authorities are interested in moving toward using inflation as a nominal anchor. Banking sector reforms have been undertaken, including phasing out explicit loan classification forbearance and strengthening supervision. Macroprudential oversight has been strengthened. However, resolution of nonperforming loans (NPLs) and recapitalization has not progressed in earnest. The legal framework for state-owned enterprise (SOE) reforms has been developed but implementation is lagging. Sustained fiscal consolidation has not materialized.