Stability The macroprudential framework is being developed The SBV has proposed establishing a Financial Stability Council, chaired by a Deputy Prime Minister, to coordinate financial stability policies. A new Monetary and Financial Stability Department was formed within the SBV to assess systemic risk, and an annual financial stability report has been prepared though not yet published. To mitigate potential systemic risks, the SBV has proposed macroprudential tightening measures including increasing the risk weight for real estate loans (reversing the previous easing) and reducing prudential ratios governing asset/liability maturity mismatches. At the same time, it proposed raising the loan-to-deposit (LTD) ratio limit for state-owned banks (from 80 to 90 percent), a policy easing. A number of welcome bank reform steps have been taken . These include phasing out explicit loan classification forbearance on new loans; restricting dividend payments at weak performing banks; strengthening on-site supervision and moving towards risk-based supervision; tightening regulations on related-party lending; plans to increase the capital of the Vietnam Asset Management Corporation (VAMC) and allow it to buy and sell NPLs at market rather than book value; and the takeover of three weak banks by the SBV while writing down existing shareholders. Progress has been made in various FSAP recommendations. The SBV is implementing a pilot experiment to identify 10 systemically important banks (D-SIBs) and undertake stress tests on them, and work is underway to enhance their management and supervision. Basel II is being piloted for 10 banks, including most D-SIBs, an early warning system is under construction, and bank data collection and reporting is being strengthened. Less progress has been made in other areas, including crisis management and bank resolution frameworks. As well, accounting standards are not in line with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Page 20 The legacy of impaired loans poses ongoing challenges: Banking-sector profitability remains weak reflecting a high level of impaired loans. Banks’ return on assets (ROA) is 0.5 percent and return on equity (ROE) is 6¼ percent, significantly lower than the averages of emerging and developing countries (about 2 and 15½ percent, respectively). While the reported capital adequacy ratio is 12¾ percent, above the regulatory minimum of nine percent, and the reported NPL ratio has declined to 2.6 percent, measured more broadly to include NPLs sold to VAMC and loans previously restructured yields an impaired loan ratio of about 12½ percent of total loans. This level of impaired loans is at the lower end of estimates based on simple relationships between ROA, ROE, and NPLs for emerging and developing countries. Vietnam: Impaired Loans (In trillion of Vietnamese dong; unless otherwise indicated) Regulatory capital Assets Classified as NPL Impaired loans, of which: Sold to VAMC Decision 780 loans State-owned banks Private sector banks 1/ Sources: Data from Vietnam authorities and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Joint stock banks, joint venture banks, fully foreign-owned banks and branches. Impaired Loan Ratio Emerging and Developing Countries: NPLs and ROA (in percent) Emerging and Developing Countries: NPLs and ROE (in percent) ROA NPLs ROE NPLs The VAMC’s current operations lack resolution incentives. Banks provision against NPLs sold to the VAMC over a 5–10 year period; they continue to manage the NPL after selling to the VAMC; and they repurchase the NPL back from the VAMC at the end of the provisioning period. This reduces incentives to resolve impaired loans quickly, and raises reported but not actual capital. The VAMC is making little progress in restructuring or selling NPLs reflecting legal constraints on collateral sale and restructuring, insufficient capacity, and inability to recognize losses. In contrast, the Debt and Asset Trading Corporation (DATC) purchases outright impaired assets with a haircut, permanently removing them from banks’ balance sheets. Page 21 Efforts to attract foreign capital are complicated by limits on foreign ownership, limited use of international accounting standards and thus transparency, and weakness in banks’ governance. The current strategy of allowing banks to recapitalize mainly via retained earnings will take many years and is risky . While financial stability has improved recently with macroeconomic stability and supportive liquidity conditions, banking-sector credit risk and potential stress from rising sovereign indebtedness have increased (Box 6). As well, corporate sector performance has deteriorated, particularly among SOEs, with potential for adverse impact on banks (Box 7). Higher domestic interest rates—related to U.S. Federal Reserve tightening or adverse global macrofinancial shocks—could exacerbate and mutually reinforce sovereign-banking-corporate risks. Staff recommended broadening reforms. Key elements include: accelerated NPL loss recognition and resolution; recapitalization by existing shareholders, including budget resources for state-owned commercial banks (SOCBs); stronger governance, operational and risk management, and adoption of IFRS reporting; enhanced supervision of SOCBs and equitization to recover initial budgetary recapitalization costs; and orderly resolution of unviable institutions. These efforts should be supported by bank diagnostic assessments and legal reforms: (i) to improve the debt enforcement and collection framework to facilitate collateral sales; and (ii) a specialized resolution regime for financial institutions, including a framework for purchase and assumption transactions. Based on official data, staff estimates recapitalization costs for public banks at around 2½ percent of GDP. Although estimates for private banks suggest no immediate recapitalization needs in aggregate, some banks have moved NPLs off-balance-sheet by establishing their own asset management companies and capital needs for individual banks likely exist. The VAMC should accelerate resolution and sale of NPLs in its portfolio. To fulfill this function and maximize recovery values through enhanced coordination and securitization, the VAMC should be strengthened, permitted to recognize losses, and pass them along to participating banks. Measures include more resources, development of valuation and securitization methodologies, and legal protection for officials involved in the valuation of loans and collateral for sale at market prices. Quantitative performance targets for NPL resolution should be established, and agent bank oversight and incentives strengthened. As well, more institutions need to be licensed to trade in NPLs and collateral. Average LTD ratios by Income Level (In percent) The proposals to tighten macroprudential policy are welcome, as they focus on mitigating financial stability risks, and implementation this year is recommended. The proposed increase in the LTD ratio for state-owned banks would raise it above the average in High Upper middle Lower middle Low Sources: IFS and IMF staff calculation. Page 22 middle-income countries. Given the lack of liquidity pressures, the increase should be forgone and the LTD limit unified at 80 percent system-wide. More broadly, macroprudential measures should focus on systemic risk and not be used for demand management. If rapid credit growth were to continue despite the proposed measures, broader-based macroprudential tightening to mitigate the build-up of credit risk would be warranted. To increase macroprudential policy effectiveness, a clear communications strategy should be established, and consideration be given to publishing the financial stability report. Building on progress made in strengthening the AML/CFT framework, the authorities are encouraged to strengthen its implementation. Under the leadership of the national AML/CFT committee, Vietnam addressed a number of the technical gaps highlighted in the 2009 APG mutual evaluation report and 2010 FATF assessment. Going forward, the key challenge remains the effective implementation of the framework commensurate with Vietnam’s ML/FT risks. The authorities agreed with the thrust of staff’s assessment and recommendations. In particular, they agreed with the need to resolve impaired loans in banks and at the VAMC, and recognized that legal constraints to resolve NPLs would need to be removed. They noted that if favorable growth conditions continued the policy of restricting dividend payments at weak performing banks would help build capital over the medium-term, though this would take years. The authorities emphasized that using budget resources to recapitalize state-owned banks would be difficult and current market conditions made attracting new private capital challenging, but they agreed that that public recapitalization costs might be recovered through a strong and well sequenced equitization program. They noted that their macroprudential framework would be finalized soon, systemic risk supervision would be strengthened to ensure financial stability, and the impact of the LTD ratio increase would be monitored carefully. To strengthen AML/CFT, a national risk assessment was under preparation.