As growth has slowed in recent years, an expansionary countercyclical policy has been adopted. Tax and tariff reductions and exemptions have contributed to a downward trend in revenues as a share of GDP, in contrast to regional experience, resulting in an expansionary revenue stance in cyclically adjusted terms. The expenditure stance has also been stimulative. For 2014, the deficit is projected to rise to around 6½ percent of GDP (GFS 2001), with lower revenue (reflecting a cut in the corporate income tax rate from 25 to 22 percent, continued tariff reductions, exemptions, and subdued growth) more than offsetting expenditure restraint, including capital outlays and a freeze on the size of the civil service and wages. Sources: Vietnamese authorities and IMF staff calculations. Expenditure stance Revenue stance Est Proj. Fiscal stance expansionary Efforts have been made to broaden the revenue base, but buoyancy has declined. Improved administration measures include reducing tax evasion and arrears, disclosing incidents of tax fraud, and streamlining VAT refund procedures while introducing thresholds. Profitable SOEs have been required to pay dividends in 2013–14. Vietnam compares favorably in the region in terms of tax revenue productivity but the base has eroded, reflecting in part exemptions and incentives. At the same time, the VAT rate was halved for certain housing projects and a further corporate income tax rate reduction, to 20 percent in 2016, is planned. Page 13 Figure 4. The fiscal position has deteriorated, and public debt is rising Fiscal revenue has been in decline… Revenue Est. …with weakness in VAT, trade, CIT, and oil revenues since Revenue, 2013 1/ (Change since 2011, and percent of GDP) Others PIT Oil revenues CIT Trade VAT c g h C ) P D G f t p g t c p ( 1/ Size of the bubble represents the share of GDP. …to limit the deterioration in the fiscal position. Fiscal balance Primary balance Fiscal Balance …in contrast to regional trends… Revenue 1/ ASEAN-4 Cambodia China 1/ ASEAN-4 includes Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. Meanwhile, capital spending has been restrained since 2011… Expenditure, 2013 1/ (Change since 2011, and percent of GDP) c g h C ) P D G f g t c p ( t p Social current expenditure Non-social current expenditure 1/ Size of the bubble represents the share of GDP. Capital expenditure Public debt is rising, with domestic debt accounting for most of the increase. Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt Foreign debt Domestic debt Est. Est. Est. Sources: Vietnamese authorities; IMF, WEO; and IMF staff estimates. Page 14 Personal Income Tax Latest available Maximum revenue productivity since 2003 Tax Revenue Productivity, 2013 Value-added Tax Latest available Maximum revenue productivity since 2003 Corporate Income Tax Latest available Maximum revenue productivity since 2003 Sources: World Economic Outlook and IMF staff calculations. Note: Revenue productivity is revenue to GDP ratio divided by tax rate. Earlier data are used if 2013 data are unavailable Room exists to adjust the composition of expenditure. Spending on education is commendably higher than in comparator low-income and emerging-market countries. However, expenditure on public employee compensation is significantly higher as a share of GDP. Capital spending has historically been in line with other low-income countries, but a decline is budgeted this year. Maintaining high-quality investment spending would improve the stock of public capital in a regional comparison. Expenditure: International Comparison Compensation for public Capital expenditure (2012) employees (2011) Low-income countries Emerging Economies Education (2011) Interest payment (2012) Health (2011) Sources: World Economic Outlook ; World Bank, World Development Indicators; IMF staff and authorities estimates. Public Capital Stock (In percent of GDP, 2011) China Cambodia Lao P.D.R Sri Lanka ASEAN-4 Sources: Center for International Comparisons, OECD, IMF staff. Note: ASEAN-4 includes Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand. Public debt is projected to increase to around 55 percent of GDP in 2014, substantially higher than just a few years ago, requiring increased attention (Box 3, and debt sustainability analysis). Maintaining the current policy trajectory would lead to higher debt even with continued expenditure restraint—including on investment, which undermines long-run growth potential—and temporary revenue measures such as SOE dividend payments. The effectiveness of the current expansionary stance is undermined by the economy’s structural constraints, it takes up fiscal space raising vulnerability to shocks, and risks crowding out lending to the private sector. Moreover, international experience indicates that public debt could rise substantially were systemic banking sector distress to materialize. SOE restructuring may also ultimately require public funds. Page 15 Box 3. Vietnam: What is an Appropriate Medium-Term Public Debt Target? Public debt in Vietnam has increased considerably in recent years. In contrast, other low income economies have generally reduced public debt ratios. Public and publicly-guaranteed debt almost doubled since 2000, and at around 55 percent of GDP in 2014, is higher than average in the region and among low-income economies. The rise has resulted from an easy fiscal stance, reflecting primary deficits, and recently, an output gap. The rise in debt accompanied higher current expenditure over this period, while capital spending remained broadly unchanged as a share of GDP. General Gross Government Debt: International LIC comparison LIC-Western Hem (percent of GDP ) LIC-Asia & Pacific LIC-Africa LIC-Middle East and Central Asia LIC-frontier 1/ Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ LIC- frontier market countries are a subset of low income countries (LIC) that have small financial sectors and/or have low annual turnover and liquidity, but nonetheless demonstrate a relative openness to and accessibility for foreign investors. Change in Debt and Investment (Percent of GDP) Change in Debt and Current Expenditure ( Percent of GDP) u v g v – t m t v g v – COG HTI TJK COD KHM TZA MMR ETH CMR MOZ TCD VNM SEN GHA SDN UGA NIC MDA BFA MLI YEM NPL BGD LAO HND ZMB Change in debt, 2007–13 – u t d p x t u C g v – u v g v MDA MOZ LAO NPL BGD HTITJK TZA NIC BFA ZMB CMR UGA MMR YEM GHA TCD SEN HND SDN VNM MLI KHM COD COG Change in debt, 2007–13 Maturity <7 years Maturity>=7 years (percent of GDP) While external concessional loans remain a large share of the debt portfolio, domestic debt has accounted for most of the increase. Domestic bond market development has provided the government additional financing sources, but vulnerabilities are building. The Domestic Bond Annual Issuance: by Maturity maturity structure has been shortened greatly, with maturities of less than seven years comprising 94 percent of total annual domestic bond issuance in the 2008–13 period. As well, agencies other than the Ministry of Finance are allowed to issue bonds with maturities exceeding one year. Cross-country experience suggests that Vietnam’s public debt is rapidly approaching an unsafe level. Three econometric models are estimated to determine thresholds beyond which debt distress could materialize. Probit and signal models are estimated using cross-country data and the results are applied using data for Vietnam, while a debt intolerance model estimates the relation between public debt and investment ratings for Vietnam. To calculate a safe debt threshold, a buffer for potential contingent liabilities is subtracted from the estimated debt distress thresholds—the value of the buffer is the average debt increase that has materialized in international experiences of systemic banking distress. The results suggest a safe debt level ranging from 40 to 45 percent of GDP for Vietnam. ______________________________________ For methodologies, see Bannister and Barrot (2013), Jarmuzek and Miao (2013), and IMF Working Paper (2014), forthcoming. Claessens and others (2011). For methodologies, see Bannister and Borrot (2013), Jarmuzek and Miao (2013), and IMF (2014), forthcoming. Claessens and others (2011). Debt distress threshold Buffer for contingent liabilities Safe threshold Source: Hanoi Stock Exchange. Intolerance Framework Signal Approach Probit Approach Debt Threshold (Percent of GDP) Debt Page 16 Staff recommended a fiscal consolidation that protects social spending and investment and makes space for potential restructuring costs . A growth-friendly consolidation that returns the debt ratio over the medium term closer to 45 percent of GDP, around the level that existed a few years ago, is achievable. The aim would be to support robust inclusive growth and poverty reduction, and mitigate risks. The adjustment would provide space for potential bank and SOE restructuring costs, higher capital spending, and maintaining critical social expenditures. Fiscal Consolidation Scenario 1/ Total revenue and grants Capital expenditure Non-interest current expenditure Interest expense Net lending (+)/borrowing (-) Public and public-guaranteed debt Real growth impact (in percentage point) Source: IMF staff. 1/ Public guaranteed debt, ODA onlending and valuation change are the same as in the baseline. Reversing the decline in the revenue to GDP ratio is a priority. Staff recommended broadening the tax base by eliminating exemptions, reducing incentives, introducing a property tax, and including pensions under personal income tax. Forgoing the planned reduction in the corporate income tax rate would contribute around ⅓ percentage points of GDP in revenue, and making permanent the requirement for SOEs to pay dividends to the budget would also contribute importantly. Strengthening administration could return revenue productivity to past higher levels and result in significant revenue gains. Staff proposed expenditure reforms along three dimensions: ensuring the sustainability of social spending and targeted measures to address inequality and growth inclusiveness; safeguarding well-targeted capital expenditure to support growth potential; and rationalizing the public wage bill in a sustainable way by replacing the across-the-board wage and hiring freezes with deeper, efficiency-enhancing civil-service reforms. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s baseline fiscal assessment. They aim to broaden the tax base and strengthen administration, but noted a property tax and personal income tax on pensions would be difficult to enact. Consideration is being given to raising excises, while income tax rate reductions are needed to support growth and competitiveness, and should result in higher revenues. Social spending will be protected with priority given to poverty reduction, agriculture and rural areas; the law on public investment has been revised to enhance efficiency and prioritization; and greater use of public-private partnerships is under consideration. The authorities concurred with the objective of containing the public sector wage bill, highlighting the importance of addressing redundant employees, and plan to undertake a public expenditure review with World Bank assistance. Page 17 The authorities are fully aware of public debt risks. They expect the debt-GDP ratio to peak around 2016 and decline afterward with a gradual consolidation, and emphasized that the government’s ceiling of 65 percent of GDP would not be breached. This would allow sufficient space for countercyclical policies. They noted that downside risks could exist if adverse external shocks materialized, or if SOE performance deteriorates, but they reiterated that public funds would not be used for banking sector restructuring.