The implementation of several recent policy measures will help improve the functioning of the banking sector. Liquidity has improved thanks to accommodative monetary conditions and FDI and remittance inflows. Most banks have been asked to submit restructuring plans to the SBV. A new risk management regulation based on Basle II is being drafted and an adoption roadmap has been developed, which will be piloted in ten banks. The VAMC has begun purchasing NPLs from commercial banks and is planning liquidation, restructuring, and outright sales to unwind them. Its capital will be increased. A revised bankruptcy law has been adopted and related legislation is under review to provide smoother enterprise restructuring and debt resolution. The limit on banks’ single foreign owner was increased slightly under an unchanged overall foreign ownership cap of 30 percent. A new Monetary and Financial Stability Department was created in the SBV, and the SBV has issued an action plan for the banking sector to supplement existing strategies. Improved liquidity has given the banking system much needed breathing space, but a number of key problems remain. Asset quality remains under pressure from weak domestic activity and recent years’ sharp decline in real estate prices, and profitability is low. Full implementation of tighter loan classification has been postponed, to 2015, allowing loan rescheduling and new lending to delinquent customers without reclassification, and some merged institutions are granted time to comply with key prudential norms. Banks have five years to provision against NPLs sold to the VAMC in exchange for bonds that are nonmarketable, pay no interest, and are not government guaranteed. Significant legal hurdles for the transfer of loan titles and collateral impede NPL resolution. The macroprudential framework requires refinement. Administrative levers including sector-specific lending directives and interest rate limits remain. To be successful, reforms must address the root causes of the problem and be bold. Weak balance sheets, regulatory forbearance, connected lending and cross ownership (including between banks and SOEs), weak risk management, and the presence of special interest groups will result in credit being channeled to unprofitable and unproductive businesses and may become a drain on public resources both in the form of foregone earnings and potential recapitalization costs. International experience shows that a resumption of robust economic growth is unlikely as long as banks remain undercapitalized and the monetary policy transmission mechanism is impaired. The piloted banks are expected to implement the Basel II basic indicator approach and standardized approach by 2015 and 2018, respectively, while the remaining joint stock banks will have to comply with the basic indicator approach by 2018. Higher shares of foreign capital are allowed upon the Prime Minister’s approval. Page 21 Figure 5. Overall financial conditions have improved, but banks remain weak After posting sharp gains in the first quarter, the stock market has corrected. Stock Market Performance 1/ (Index, January 2012=100) Indonesia Jakarta Index Thailand SET Index Malaysia FTSE Index Vietnam HOSE Index Philippines PSE Index Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 1/ Data as of June 16, 2014. The government is facing a more favorable financing environment. Domestic Bond Yield Curve (Percent per annum) One year ago Six months ago Today 1YR 2YR 3YR 5YR 7YR 10YR 15YR Sovereign spreads have narrowed by more than those in emerging Asia. Sovereign Bond Spreads (In percentage points) Gross foreign purchase of government bonds (right axis, in millions of USD) Vietnam, EMBIG spread Emerging Asia, EMBIG spread Vietnam, credit default swaps Jan-12 Apr-12 Jul-12 Oct-12 Jan-13 Apr-13 Jul-13 Oct-13 Jan-14 Apr-14 Bank funding costs continue to decline... Interest Rates (In percent per annum) Interbank overnight rate 3-month deposit rate Interbank 1-week rate Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 …but asset quality is poor… …and banks continue to deleverage. NPL Ratio 1/ Loan-to-Deposit Ratio 1/ ASEAN-4 Philippines Thailand Malaysia Indonesia 1/ Vietnam as of April 2014; Philippines as of September 2013; Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia as of end-2013. Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 1/ ASEAN-4 includes Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. Sources: Vietnamese authorities; Bloomberg LP; IMF, WEO; and IMF staff estimates. Page 22 Staff recommended using breathing space created by improved liquidity conditions to adopt a more comprehensive and sequenced reform agenda (Box 6). Core pillars include: a more expeditious recognition of NPLs, supported by bank diagnostic assessments and legal and SOE reforms; restructuring and recapitalization of viable banks; and orderly exit of insolvent institutions, supported if necessary by a stronger safety net. A revamped VAMC, with ability to buy and sell impaired loans at market value as is currently under consideration, could play a significant role. The crisis management framework and supervision should be strengthened, and the use of administrative measures gradually eliminated. The authorities agreed with the thrust of staff’s recommendations, but argued for a more gradual pace. More time was needed to match banks’ capacity to absorb losses generated by stricter regulatory standards, and to support the economic recovery. In their view, the root causes of banking sector weakness were clearly identified, forbearance had been tightened, banks were required to report NPLs to the SBV under stricter norms, and financial weaknesses were not systemic. The constraints imposed by the existing legal system and connected lending that complicate NPL resolution, and the decision not to use public funds for recapitalization, were well understood. The authorities acknowledged the recommendation that a comprehensive reform package, including solutions to tackle the constraints of budgetary resources and legal reforms, is needed to accelerate banking reform and NPL resolution. They emphasized that progress had been made in this process.