Economic performance has improved over the last year, with the challenge now to mitigate vulnerabilities. Growth is improving gradually, underpinned by robust exports and foreign direct investment (FDI) while domestic activity remains subdued. Inflation has declined to mid-single digits. The external current account remains in large surplus and international reserves have increased. Significant gains in poverty reduction made in recent decades have been preserved (Box 1). Notwithstanding, growth is below its previous trend, and the economy is exposed to spillovers from downside external shocks. Domestic vulnerabilities also exist, including banking sector weakness and inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs), both of which are restraining activity. Public and publicly guaranteed debt has risen to a level that requires attention. Sources: World Bank Development Indicators and Vietnamese authorities. 1/ Headcount at US$1.25 per day, for Vietnam official rate (2012). Poverty Headcount (In percent of population) 1/ Cambodia Lao P.D.R. Myanmar China ASEAN-4 The authorities place a high priority on securing macroeconomic stability and strengthening fundamentals. The government’s socio-economic development plan (through 2020) targets average growth of 6½–7 percent with single-digit inflation. It prioritizes macroeconomic stability, tackling banking sector vulnerabilities, and reforming SOEs and public investment. Accelerating and deepening the agenda, creating fiscal space to address potential contingent liabilities from reforms while safeguarding critical social and investment spending, would mitigate risks and facilitate achievement of the development goals. Moving gradually toward using inflation as a nominal anchor with greater exchange rate flexibility would provide a monetary policy framework more conducive to maintaining stability and buffering external shocks. Policies are broadly in line with past Fund advice, although along a more cautious timeline. The authorities have made progress on many priorities outlined in the last Article IV consultation. Banking system reforms have been initiated, including individual bank restructuring plans, and a scheme to transfer nonperforming loans (NPLs) to an asset management company. However, full implementation of prudential regulations to bring asset classification and provisioning closer to international standards has been delayed, with concurrent slow progress in NPL resolution and bank recapitalization. SOE restructuring has moved forward with plans for equitization, enhanced transparency, and improvements in the legal framework, although implementation has been slow. Fiscal consolidation has not materialized. Page 5 Box 1. Vietnam: Poverty Reduction, Inclusive Growth, and Remaining Challenges Vietnam has made remarkable progress improving living conditions and reducing poverty. It employs two approaches to measure poverty. The first uses a “basic needs” poverty line adjusted for inflation, adopted in the early 1990s with assistance from the World Bank and updated in 2010. By this measure, the national poverty rate declined from 58 percent in 1993 to around 17 percent in 2012. A second approach, initially based on rice equivalents and revised in 2005 to use basic needs, but adjusted for inflation only every five years, shows poverty fell from around 28 percent in the early 1990s to around 9½ percent by 2012—the official rate. Poverty Reduction Official MOLISA poverty HCR GSO-WB poverty HCR Rebasing Source: World Bank. While growth has been pro-poor under both measures, success has brought some additional challenges. Inequality has risen slightly compared to the 1990s, spurred by changing patterns of employment away from agriculture, and from low-skill to higher-skill work. The Gini coefficient was 0.39 in 2012, comparable to that of other middle-income countries in the region. The remaining poor depend heavily on subsistence agriculture and live in remote upland rural regions, isolated from main markets. Poverty has also taken an increasingly ethnic dimension, as the income gap between ethnic minorities and the Kinh majority has grown. Many incomes remain close to the poverty level, and are susceptible to falling back into poverty as a result of macroeconomic shocks. The quality of, and access to, public services and social assistance vary between rich and poor households. Based on these findings and cross-country experience, a number of policies could reinforce poverty reduction and support inclusive growth: Ensuring macroeconomic stability and reducing vulnerabilities, and structural reforms to support robust, sustainable growth. Supporting productivity growth in rural areas through improved connectivity, strengthening skills, improving the investment climate, expanding access to basic services, better targeting agricultural and social support, and fostering the occupational and geographic mobility of labor. Improving access of the poor to higher-quality education and health services, particularly in rural areas and by minority ethnic groups, would help address inequality of opportunities. New Poverty Estimates for 2012 by Urban and Rural Areas WB-GSO Poverty Estimates Poverty Rate Contribution (Percent) (Percent) Official Poverty Estimates Poverty Rate (Percent) Population Shares (Percent) National Urban Rural Sources: World Bank and Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs. As the economy is restructured, social spending and social assistance should be better targeted to take into account regional differences in the cost of living and basic services. Improving the system for monitoring and publishing data on poverty to deliver reliable and accurate information to policymakers and the public. __________________ “ Well Begun, Not Yet Done: Vietnam’s Remarkable Progress on Poverty Reduction and the Emerging Challenges ,” World Bank in Vietnam, Hanoi (2012). Page 6