Maintaining a supportive monetary stance is appropriate as long as inflation pressures remain absent . Evidence of an excess supply gap exists, growth is below potential, core inflation has declined, and wage pressures are benign. As well, the transmission of easier monetary conditions to credit growth appears to have been dampened in recent years (Box 4). At this juncture, easy monetary conditions do not pose a risk to financial stability. Real estate prices remain subdued and equity market price/earnings ratios are around 15 percent. Indeed, supportive liquidity conditions are currently facilitating banking system adjustment. If significant capital outflows were to occur, greater exchange rate flexibility should be the first line of defense, and consideration might also be given to raising domestic interest rates. Moving gradually toward using inflation as a nominal anchor would provide a better framework for monetary policy . Currently there exist multiple targets and instruments, including broad money, bank credit, and various interest rates. A daily US$/VND exchange rate target is announced, with a band of ±1 percent. Maintaining a supportive stance and the exchange rate peg will be challenging in the near term if global interest rates rise. In the medium term, the economy will increasingly face asymmetric shocks and would benefit from an independent monetary policy. To start, the band for exchange rate fluctuation could be gradually widened, reforms initiated to promote a deep and liquid foreign exchange market and establish an interest rate instrument while reducing reliance on quantitative targets, liquidity forecasting and management improved, and monetary policy communications increasingly geared toward price stability. Greater exchange rate flexibility would help absorb external shocks and facilitate reserves accumulation. The real effective exchange rate has appreciated by about 2 percent compared to a year ago. However, the results of CGER-type analysis and broader trends in the balance of payments suggest there is no convincing evidence of misalignment. Notwithstanding, further strengthening international reserve adequacy would improve resilience (Box 5). The SBV viewed inflation control as a top priority since early 2011 to achieve a more stable macroeconomic environment conducive for structural reforms . Supportive monetary conditions remained appropriate in the near term, given low inflation and weak demand, as well as the dampened transmission mechanism that reflected economic restructuring, financial weaknesses, and low demand for credit. Despite the recent strong increase in reserves, the authorities considered further accumulation as desirable, to bring them more in line with adequacy metrics. Page 18 Box 4. Vietnam: The Effects of Monetary Policy on Bank Lending Monetary policy generally affects the supply of bank credit through two channels. The first is direct and common across banks. The second may vary according to the financial position of each bank—the bank lending channel—whereby stronger banks are less reliant on central bank funding than weaker banks and therefore less responsive to changes in policy. This box investigates the extent to which credit supply depends on policy rates in Vietnam, and if this relationship varies with banks’ financial characteristics. A model is estimated on a panel of balance sheet data for state-owned and other commercial banks over 2000–2013, using an Arellano-Bond GMM specification with fixed effects. To isolate the bank lending channel, the model introduces an interaction term between the policy interest rate and observed financial heterogeneity across banks. It controls for loan demand determinants, such as past loan growth, GDP growth, and the cyclical effects on banks’ profitability, size, liquidity, capital, and borrowers’ risk (loan loss provision); as well as unobserved heterogeneity, e.g., business models and risk propensity. Allowing for the possibility that monetary policy may affect credit decisions differently after the financial disruption in 2011, a time dummy interacting with relevant lagged explanatory variables is included. For bank i in period t, loan growth ( L i,t ) is specified as follows: Elasticity of loan growth to changes in the refinancing rate, and banks' financial position over two years Key findings: First, changes in monetary policy have an inverse direct impact on private credit growth that is common across banks. Second, the bank lending channel emerges after 2011. Credit supply by the banking system as a whole reacts less to policy rate changes compared to the earlier period, when the impact of policy did not vary with banks’ financial positions. This channel has dampened the transmission mechanism. Third, banks’ health is an overwhelming factor determining credit supply. A weakening of banks lowers credit growth, ceteris paribus , while strengthening banks’ capital and liquidity would have a vigorous positive impact on credit growth _______________ See Kashyap and Stein (1995) on the role of bank size in monetary policy transmission mechanism; Kishan and Opiela (2000), Van der Heuvel (2002), and Bernanke (2007) on capitalization; and Kashyap and Stein (2000) and Chatelain and others (2003) on liquidity position. L denotes loan growth (y/y), excluding interbank positions; MP is the SBV’s refinancing rate; NGDP is GDP growth (y/y); ROE is return on equity; LLP is loan loss provisions to asset ratio; w is a vector of ROE and LLP while z is a vector of bank size, liquidity ratio, and capital ratio, standardized across banks; and d =1 during 2012Q1–2013Q4, and 0 otherwise. The elasticities are in line with estimates for Germany, France, and Italy during 1999–2011 (De Santis and Surico, 2013). At 10 percent statistical significance level. Liquidity ratio Not significant Bank lending Bank lending Capital ratio channel channel Significant Direct Direct Page 19 Box 5. Vietnam: External Sector Assessment Approach Underlying current account balance Current account norm Required change in the current account Implied over (+) / under (-) valuation Source: IMF staff estimates. 1/ NFA norm of -68 percent of GDP. Macro- balance External Sustainability 1/ Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate Equilibrium RER Upper Bound Lower Bound REER CGER-type analysis based on the macro-balance and external sustainability approaches suggests the real exchange rate is moderately undervalued, requiring a 5–8 percent real effective appreciation to close the gap between the underlying and estimated current account norm, ceteris paribus . In contrast, after a sharp real appreciation in 2012–13 (reflecting high relative consumer price inflation), the equilibrium real exchange rate approach points to substantial overvaluation, with a real effective depreciation of about 16 percent needed to restore equilibrium. These results are well within the margin of error, which can be large. Broader trends also suggest there is no convincing evidence of misalignment. The external balance of the FDI-intensive export-oriented sector remains in significant surplus, with the recent overall current account improvement largely reflecting a correction in the domestic economy, and thus cyclical weakness. Wages remain competitive, and foreign direct investment inflows remain robust. These considerations are tempered by the level of reserves (see below) and the risk of the exchange rate becoming overvalued if large public contingent liabilities are realized during bank restructuring. Capital and financial account flows have been dominated by foreign direct investment and relatively smaller portfolio flows into the country’s two stock markets. Despite the lack of large and internationally integrated capital markets, other financial flows have been quite volatile, as demonstrated by the large outflows recorded in the balance of payments in the second quarter of 2013 and large negative errors and omissions. Although they increased recently, measured against several metrics Vietnam’s international reserves are lower than before the global financial crisis, and below regional comparator countries. In early-2014, reserves made up about 2½ months of prospective imports of goods and services, well below the 8 months average of regional emerging market countries, and below the minimum level desirable for countries with a fixed exchange rate, according to the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric. Staff’s overall assessment is that the external position would benefit from further strengthening. The relatively strong current account position is the result of productivity gains in the FDI-dominated export sector, a well diversified export base and markets, and the weak cyclical position of the domestic economy. As domestic demand recovers in the baseline scenario, the external position will likely deteriorate owing to high import elasticity. An accelerated pace of structural reforms beyond staff’s baseline are needed to improve productivity, particularly in the domestic sector, and increase investment efficiency to bolster external sustainability. Fiscal consolidation, a more flexible exchange rate and higher reserves would also reduce vulnerabilities. Source: IMF staff estimates. External Current Account Overall Foreign investment enterprises Domestic economy Sources: Vietnamese authorities; and IMF staff estimates Reserve Adequacy Metric Dynamics (Reserves in percent of reserve metric) Fixed Exchange Rate Flexible Exchange Rate "Adequate" Reserves 2000Q1 2002Q1 2004Q1 2006Q1 2008Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 2014Q1 Sources: Vietnamese authorities; and IMF staff estimates Regional Comparison of Reserve Indicators Months of Imports of G&S 1/ Percent of Exports of G&S Percent of Broad Money Percent of Short- Term Debt Percent of GDP China India Indonesia Malaysia Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Average 2/ Sources: Vietnamese authorities; IMF, WEO ; and staff estimates. 1/ In months of prospective imports of G&S. 2/ Excludes Singapore for short-term debt indicator. Page 20 The SBV broadly agreed with recommendations to enhance the monetary policy framework. The authorities explained that they had increasingly implemented monetary policy through short-term interbank interest rates, and were beginning to view money and credit targets as indicative. Liquidity forecasting had improved, and progress had been made in communicating the rationale for policy action to help guide market expectations. They noted that a stronger banking system and increased confidence in the currency would be needed to facilitate a smooth transition from the exchange rate to inflation as a nominal anchor over the medium term.