RISKS Economic growth was robust last year, but it slowed entering 2016 Real GDP rose by 6¾ percent (y/y) in 2015, underpinned by supportive macrofinancial policy settings. Both investment and consumption contributed to strong domestic demand. After holding up well Free trade agreements were concluded in 2015 with the Eurasian Economic Union, Korea, and the European Union. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement was signed in February 2016. Page 10 through the first half of last year export growth began to moderate in the second half, reflecting lower commodity prices and slowing external demand. Import growth, mainly machinery and intermediate goods, was strong in the first three quarters, reflecting a tooling-up of capacity related to recent trade agreements, but it also slowed toward year-end, especially inputs for export processing. Real GDP growth slowed to 5½ percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2016. Agriculture production fell sharply owing to a severe drought and arable land salinization, and industrial production moderated in line with soft trade. Contribution to GDP Growth by Economic Activities (2010 prices) (In percent) Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries Construction GDP Growth Industry Services Inflation and Output Gap (Year-on-year percent change) Headline (LHS) Output gap (In percent of potential GDP, RHS) Core (excl. raw food, energy and administered prices W=0.58, LHS)¹ 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 2014Q1 2015Q1 2016Q1 W=2014 Weight Inflation has fallen significantly Headline inflation fell to below 1 percent (y/y) before ticking upward in early 2016 due to higher food and administered healthcare prices. Core inflation excluding administered price adjustments has fallen to around 1¾ percent (y/y). Lower fuel and import prices, absence of wage pressures, and a small output gap were the main drivers. Real estate prices have increased slightly, but remain below their previous peak, partly owing to a substantial increase in supply, particularly residential apartments, hotels, and retail space. Credit growth picked up to 19¼ percent (y/y) in early 2016, reflecting demand, an easing of macroprudential policy via lower risk weights on lending to the real estate and securities sectors, and higher credit growth targets for the banking sector announced by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) (18–20 percent (y/y) for 2016). State-owned banks expanded credit at a significantly faster rate than private banks and most of the increase was to the real estate, financial, and personal sectors including mortgages, raising concerns over the productivity of new credit. Contribution to Credit Growth (Year-on-year percent change) Credit Growth by Type of Credit Institutions (Year-on-year percentage change) Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries Industry Construction Trade, transportation and communication Real estate Financial and other services Total Credit to the economy Credit by SOCBs 1/ Credit by non-SOCBs 2012Q4 2013Q1 2013Q2 2013Q3 2013Q4 2014Q1 2014Q2 2014Q3 2014Q4 2015Q1 2015Q2 2015Q3 Jan-13 May-13 Sep-13 Jan-14 May-14 Sep-14 Jan-15 May-15 Sep-15 Jan-16 1/ Includes the four main state banks: Vietcombank, Incombank, BARD and BIDV. Page 11 Heightened global financial volatility spilled over into domestic markets in the second half of 2015, but conditions have improved recently . In response to short-term and portfolio capital outflows and downward pressure on the exchange rate, the SBV made the exchange rate regime more flexible (see text box) and intervened in support of the dong. International reserves declined by an estimated US$9 billion from their 2015 peak to around US$28.3 billion (below 2 months of imports), low by most metrics. In the first months of this year, capital flows reversed with portfolio and direct investment inflows, and international reserves increased to US$29 billion in February. Government bond yields are slightly lower at the short end and up about 25 basis points at the long end compared to a year ago, while EMBIG and CDS spreads have widened around 25 basis points. Equity markets were relatively volatile, but broadly unchanged from a year ago. Text Box: Exchange Rate Developments U g Gross international reserves (right axis) Exchange Rates 1/ Bloomberg mid-interbank rate Parallel rate Central rate Lower band Upper band In the first half of 2015 the central exchange rate fixing against the U.S. dollar was devalued by 2 percent in two separate steps, while the +/-1 percent trading band for the interbank rate around the central rate was retained. In August 2015 the SBV widened the trading band first to +/-2 percent, and then to +/-3 percent while devaluing the central rate by 1 percent. In December, pressures resurfaced when the U.S. Federal Reserve increased interest rates, prompting the authorities subsequently to introduce a more flexible mechanism for setting the daily central exchange rate based on: (i) the previous day’s dong/USD exchange rate; (ii) exchange rates of countries that have substantial trade and financial links with Vietnam; and (iii) domestic macroeconomic conditions. The +/-3 percent trading band was retained. By end-2015, the dong had depreciated by about 5 percent against the dollar, but was about 3½ percent appreciated in real effective terms. In the first months of this year, the central rate has appreciated slightly and the interbank exchange rate has appreciated well off the bottom of the trading band. 1/ An upward movement indicates an appreciation of the dong. Aug-15 Oct-15 Dec-15 Oct-14 Dec-14 b U Feb-15 Apr-15 Jun-15 Feb-16 Apr-16 A dual, segmented external current account position continues . The surplus narrowed sharply with rising imports last year and the domestic sector continued to run a trade deficit. However, FDI strengthened, exports of foreign-invested enterprises (FIEs) continued to perform well, and the FIE sector’s trade surplus remained. While no clear evidence of exchange rate misalignment exists, the external position should be strengthened through higher reserves and structural and SOE reforms to improve domestic-sector competitiveness that facilitate productivity spillovers from the FIE sector (Boxes 1 and 2). Page 12 FIE sector Vietnam: Exports–Domestic and FIE Sector (Rolling 12-months, in billions of U.S. dollars) Domestic sector v N v N v N Vietnam: Trade Balance - Domestic and FIE Sector FIE sector Domestic sector Sources: Vietnamese authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: Vietnamese authorities; and IMF staff calculations. The near-term outlook is broadly positive, but challenges exist . Growth is projected to moderate this year to around 6 percent. The softening reflects the drought that has adversely impacted agriculture, lower external demand, and spillovers of tighter global financial conditions. Headline inflation is projected to rise due to higher food and administered prices, although the underlying rate should remain moderate absent broad-based demand pressures. The current account balance is projected to decline slightly in the near term as exports and imports soften. It would improve thereafter as the export sector responds to increased productive capacity and free trade agreements. FDI inflows are projected to remain strong while short-term capital outflows moderate. Over the medium term, growth is projected to settle around its potential rate of 6¼ percent. A bolder policy package of structural, fiscal, and banking reforms would raise productivity, mitigate risks, and facilitate sustained higher long-run growth. Widening imbalances pose increasing risks to the outlook that, if not addressed, could potentially interact to create macrofinancial spillbacks On the domestic side , the drought’s impact on agriculture could be deeper and more sustained. Inadequate fiscal consolidation would further increase public debt and debt distress risk, reduce space for bank and SOE reform costs, and pressure interest rates, which could worsen corporate performance and banks’ credit quality, creating spillbacks for sovereign risk. Rising private external debt increases the costs of—and potentially constrains incentives to allow—further exchange rate flexibility. Banking-sector risks remain owing to slow progress in recapitalization and NPL resolution. Sustained rapid credit growth—particularly to sectors that do not raise the economy’s growth potential—could fuel future NPLs and increase banking sector risks. Distress in the banking sector could exacerbate public debt distress risk, undermine growth, and cause an abrupt exchange-rate shock. External shocks could trigger domestic risks . Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions or a sustained surge in the U.S. dollar could re-ignite capital outflows and pressure on the exchange rate, and raise domestic interest rates. International reserves, which are already low, could decline further absent exchange-rate flexibility. Slower global growth or a sharp slowdown in China could undermine exports. Persistently lower oil prices would benefit the external balance, but raise the fiscal deficit absent structural revenue-raising measures. Page 13 Vietnam: Risk Assessment Matrix Event Up/Down- Side Likelihood Impact Transmission Channels Policy Recommendations Public debt/GDP ratio increases further; inadequate fiscal consolidation; private external debt continues rising Banking-sector NPLs are exacerbated, high credit growth to real estate and the financial sector create new risks Prolonged drought and salinization events   High Medium Higher interest rates, exchange rate pressure, weaker confidence, crowding out Broaden revenue base, reduce exemptions, strengthen administration, introduce a property tax, curtail non- essential spending, civil service reform. Allow greater exchange rate flexibility. Medium High Adverse macro-financial feedback loop Accelerate NPL resolution and recapitalization of systemically important banks, resolve small unviable banks, strengthen safety nets. Reduce credit growth targets, tighten macroprudential policies.  Medium Medium Successive crop yields underperform, spillovers to trade, transport and agro- industry Monetary policy should look through first round effects on inflation to possible second round effects. Make fiscal space for mitigation expenditures. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions, surge in the U.S. dollar  High Medium Capital outflows pressure exchange rate and reserves, confidence declines Allow greater exchange rate flexibility, move toward using inflation as a nominal anchor. Accelerate fiscal consolidation, and structural reforms to support confidence and FDI. Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies / significant China slowdown  Medium Medium Weaker export growth, FDI and remittances Allow greater exchange rate flexibility, move toward using inflation as a nominal anchor. Accelerate financial sector, SOE and structural reforms to improve productivity, FDI, and domestic activity. Persistently lower energy prices  External   Fiscal High Low High Improved current account balance / lower fiscal revenues Allow exchange rate flexibility. Strengthen revenue: broaden base, reduce exemptions, strengthen administration, introduce a property tax. Deeper integration in regional supply chains Earlier-than-expected implementation of TPP or further FTAs Accelerated adoption of monetary policy focus on inflation stability with greater exchange rate flexibility    Medium Medium Medium Medium Stronger exports, improved current account balance Stronger imports, FDI, exports and investment; productivity improvement Medium Medium Increased macroeconomic stability, investment, and reserves Allow exchange rate flexibility, strengthen international reserves buffers. Accelerate SOE and market reforms, and adapt the monetary policy framework to focus on inflation stability with more exchange rate flexibility. Strengthen monetary policy operational and institutional frameworks, adopt a medium-term inflation objective. Some upside risks exist . Faster rebalancing in China would benefit finished-goods exports— where Vietnam has already made inroads—and Vietnam is expected to remain among the main beneficiaries of China’s rebalancing. Making use of the new more flexible exchange-rate regime while focusing monetary policy increasingly on inflation stability would provide a shock absorber against external shocks, safeguard macroeconomic stability, and permit an increase in reserves. Rapid implementation of the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and other bilateral trade agreements are an upside opportunity that would usher in productivity gains, fuel exports, and incentivize reforms. “ China and the CLMV: Integration, Evolution, and Implications,” forthcoming IMF report. Page 14 The authorities broadly concurred with the near-term outlook and risks, and see opportunities to intensify the pace of reforms . They highlighted the progress made on bank and SOE reforms and stressed their commitment to accelerate implementation as part of their socio- economic plan aimed at growth averaging 6½–7 percent during the next five years. They agreed on downside risks from the drought and potential global and regional volatility, but noted that for the latter, increased exchange-rate flexibility would limit the impact on Vietnam. The slowdown of imports, combined with strong FDI inflows and declining capital outflows has helped replenish international reserves significantly since February. The authorities agreed with the need to reverse the trend of public debt to preserve macroeconomic stability.