Monetary policy was accommodative over most of last year against the backdrop of falling inflation. Short-term interbank interest rates fluctuated below the SBV’s repo rate with abundant liquidity, and banks rapidly expanded lending to meet the SBV’s credit growth target. Liquidity conditions were tightened around year end when currency pressures arose. Vietnam: Interest Rates (In percent) Apr-15 Refinance rate Repo rate Interbank rate (Overnight) Jun-15 Aug-15 Oct-15 Dec-15 Feb-16 Apr-16 Staff recommended keeping monetary policy on hold as the impact of recent shocks feed through the economy . Although headline inflation has risen, this reflects the adverse supply shock to agriculture and administered price changes. Underlying inflation is benign and growth is slowing. If underlying inflation were to pick up due to second-round effects, a tightening would be appropriate. If not, and inflation stalls while growth weakens further, some easing could be considered. With external demand slowing, such an easing could also come about in part through exchange-rate depreciation. Monetary operations should aim to stabilize the overnight interbank interest rate close to the policy repo rate. Improved liquidity management and forecasting would strengthen policy effectiveness. Establishing an interest-rate corridor, with an overnight standing credit facility Page 18 as the ceiling, a deposit facility as the floor, and the overnight interbank rate guided to the center of the band through liquidity operations, would also enhance effectiveness. Shifts in the corridor would then clearly signal changes in the policy stance. The 2016 credit growth target should not be binding . If met, it would increase the credit intensity of growth and the credit-to-GDP ratio to levels signaling heightened risk and that have been associated with previous periods of macroeconomic instability and elevated inflation in Vietnam. Allowing credit growth to decline to below 15 percent in response to monetary and macroprudential policies would reduce the expansion of the credit-to-GDP ratio below risky levels. Over time, use of administrative measures, including credit growth targets and interest rate ceilings, should be phased out as monetary operations are strengthened. This would make policy settings more coherent, and complement efforts to reform the framework and improve the transmission mechanism. Vietnam: Credit Intensity of Growth and Inflation (in percent) Credit intensity of growth Inflation (1-year lag, RHS) Vietnam: Percentage Change in Credit/GDP, 2002–16 1/ (In percentage points; y-o-y) 1/ The red line represents a year-on-year increase in the credit/GDP ratio by 7 percentage points. Increases of this magnitude have been associated with financial crisis empirically ( GFSR , September 2011). The adoption of a more flexible exchange-rate regime is commendable and could enhance monetary-policy independence . Use of the new regime should be made to buffer external shocks. Recent foreign exchange intervention to build reserves opportunistically is appropriate. Achieving at least the lower bound of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric— approximately three months of prospective goods and services imports—would strengthen buffers that could be used to smooth periods of substantial volatility. Gradually shifting the monetary-policy framework toward using inflation as the nominal anchor would facilitate greater macroeconomic stability (Box 4). Placing less weight on exchange-rate stabilization would discourage one-way bets. In this context, broader operational, communications and institutional reforms are needed (Box 5). Near term priorities include reforms to strengthen the interest rate instrument and communications with enhanced focus on inflation stability. The authorities emphasized that the SBV conducts monetary policy with inflation control as the primary objective while supporting other objectives from time to time . This had helped maintain macroeconomic stability. They also stressed that the change in exchange-rate policy was a success and contributed to the recent appreciation of the dong by eliminating one- Page 19 sided expectations. The SBV noted that it would conduct research on enhancing the monetary policy framework and would seek technical assistance from the Fund as needed. In the near term, the authorities indicated they would maintain current policy settings, given that higher headline inflation reflects non-monetary factors. They are monitoring credit growth closely, and while higher targets are supportive of growth, credit is being channeled through policy directives to productive sectors based on individual banks’ health, and is thus consistent with continued low inflation and macroeconomic stability.