Fiscal policy has been loose in recent years Deficits have averaged 6½ percent of GDP since 2012. Revenue as a share of GDP dropped in this period, reflecting corporate income tax rate and tariff reductions, tax exemptions and incentives, and declining oil revenues. Current expenditures including interest payments increased, while capital expenditure has been constrained. Preliminary estimates show the 2015 deficit moderated to 5.9 percent of GDP . The deficit outcome was close to the budget plan, but the composition was markedly different. Revenues rose very strongly, exceeding the budget plan by 2 percent of GDP and reversing the downward trend in the revenue-to-GDP ratio. The overperformance mainly reflected better tax administration, and higher environmental taxes, local government revenue, land user rights sales, and SOE dividends. These more than offset falling oil revenues. Expenditure was higher than planned, reflecting carry-forward spending of 2014 local government revenue, and higher capital and social expenditures. Interest expense also rose. A deficit of 6½ percent of GDP is projected for 2016, the same as the budget plan but with higher revenue and expenditure . Gains made in tax and nontax revenue are projected to be largely sustained in the near term, more than offsetting the impact of a 2 percentage point (to 20 percent) cut in the corporate income tax rate. Carry-forward spending of last year’s local government revenue overperformance will occur again. This is estimated to add about 1½ percent of GDP to expenditures compared with the authorities’ budget. Page 15 Public debt has risen sharply, and the risk of debt distress has climbed. The ratio of public and publicly-guaranteed (PPG) debt to GDP is projected to increase to 62 percent in 2016, up over 16 percentage points in the past five years, reflecting persistently high budget deficits and lower-than-projected nominal GDP due to low inflation. Under staff’s baseline projection, which incorporates a modest consolidation to a deficit around 5 percent of GDP in the medium term, PPG debt would rise toward 70 percent of GDP, elevating the risk of debt distress (Appendix 1 debt sustainability analysis). The authorities’ draft medium-term budget plan indicates a deficit around 3 percent of GDP by 2020 . Such a consolidation would be appropriate, but there are substantial challenges to achieving it. Structural revenue-enhancing policies have yet to be approved, and over the medium term tax exemptions and trade tariff reductions due to trade agreements will undermine buoyancy, and nontax revenues could ease due to declining SOE dividends as equitization (i.e., privatization) advances. The authorities hope to restrain social spending by increasing fees for public healthcare and education to incentivize greater use of private services, but higher fees would also raise social insurance costs. Civil service reform, which could yield substantial savings, is not yet planned. In the absence of revenue enhancements or current savings, the burden of adjustment could fall on large cuts to capital spending, which would undermine growth. PPG Debt, 2015–2021 No consolidation scenario (6.5% deficit) 5%-deficit-by-2020 scenario 3%-deficit-by-2020 scenario Capital Expenditure, 2010–2021 (Assumes no substantive revenue gains, in percent of GDP) No consolidation scenario (6.5% deficit) 5%-deficit-by-2020 scenario 3%-deficit-by-2020 scenario 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Fiscal consolidation should begin this year with growth-friendly measures and include funds for bank recapitalization . Deficit reduction of ¾ of a percentage point of GDP per year, together with accelerated structural and bank reforms that could gradually boost real GDP growth to its historical average—and the authorities’ medium-term objective—of 7 percent, would place the debt ratio on a downward path and mitigate debt distress risk. Using public money to recapitalize state-owned banks up front—estimated at 2½ percent of GDP (see below)—would result in a manageable near-term debt increase, reduce uncertainty, and provide insurance against potentially larger public sector liabilities that could arise if banks were to face heightened distress with weakened capital positions. Page 16 Vietnam: Fiscal Consolidation Scenario 1/ Consolidation 2015 Est. Total revenue and grants Capital expenditure Non-interest current expenditure Interest expense Net lending (+)/borrowing (-) Primary surplus (+)/deficit (-) Public and public-guaranteed debt 2/ Real growth Assumed fiscal multiplier Cumulative real growth impact of consolidation (in percentage points) Source: IMF staff. 1/ Public guaranteed debt, interest rates, ODA onlending and valuation changes are assumed to be the same as in the baseline. 2/ 2016 PPG debt includes banking restructuring cost, 2.5 percent of GDP. Vietnam: Total Revenues and Grants, 2004-15 Other revenues Oil tax revenues Non-oil tax revenues Total revenues and grants: 2022, consolidation scenario Structural revenue-enhancing policies will be needed to offset the adverse impact of permanent revenue- reducing factors . Measures that could be taken this year include reducing exemptions and incentives, further increasing fuel and environmental taxation while protecting the poor through targeted transfers, eliminating the lower VAT rate of 5 percent, and further strengthening revenue administration. Additional measures that could be implemented subsequently include broadening the tax base by introducing a property, interest income, and capital gains tax and including pensions under personal income tax. Together, these would raise the revenue-to-GDP ratio back to its long-run average. Using equitization proceeds to finance the deficit would further restrain debt and enhance National Assembly oversight of these funds. 2014 est. 2015 est. Room exists to rationalize the public wage bill and enhance the efficiency of public spending . Expenditure on public employment is significantly higher than in other countries in the region. A comprehensive civil service reform is needed. Spending on education is commendably higher than in comparable countries in the region and yields good results in primary and secondary education, although there is room to improve vocational and tertiary education (Box 3). Healthcare spending is in line with comparable Compensation for Public Employees, 2012 Bangladesh 2011 Cambodia Sri Lanka Philippines Laos, Republic of Malaysia Thailand Average of low-income economies Page 17 countries and yields good results. Plans to increase the role of the private sector in education and healthcare should proceed carefully to ensure quality and protect access for the poor. Improvements in public capital spending efficiency are needed to narrow the infrastructure gap, with stronger control and coordination at the provincial level. The authorities agreed with the need to reduce the fiscal deficit and arrest the rise in public debt . They emphasized their intention to reduce the deficit to 4 percent on average over the 2016-2020 period, falling to around 3 percent by 2020, and to maintain debt below the legal limit of 65 percent of GDP. They noted staff’s medium-term consolidation scenario and advice to broaden the revenue base, and were working on tax policies to raise revenue, expected to be implemented in the next few years. Introduction of a property tax had been studied and the reintroduction of the capital gains tax and unification of the VAT rate at 10 percent were being considered. The authorities also noted their success to date in reducing tax evasion. Increases in tax rates were not planned in the near term. On the expenditure side, the authorities recognized the need to reduce the public wage bill, and they noted plans to increase participation by non-state actors in education and healthcare to reduce costs to the budget. They also highlighted the need to make capital expenditure more efficient, while increasing use of PPPs for infrastructure development. The Ministry of Finance emphasized that bank recapitalization costs should not result in public debt exceeding the legal limit.