Developments in 2013. The fiscal deficit for 2013 is projected to reach 8.6 percent of GDP, assuming that the government implements planned fourth quarter spending cuts through reducing spending on goods and services (0.3 percent of GDP savings relative to the budget for the fourth quarter) and maintaining capital spending at least 0.5 percent of GDP below the annual budget. Virtually all categories of spending have deviated substantially from approved levels. The sharp increase in wages (45 percent, compared to the budgeted 9.1 percent), and the large overruns on subsidies—4.0 percent of GDP, compared to a budget of less than 0.7 percent—forced the government to make sharp cuts in goods and services, intergovernmental transfers, and capital spending. To finance the above-budget deficit, the authorities have increased issuance of Treasury bills, used part of the 2012 Eurobond proceeds that had earlier been transferred to SOEs for investments but had not yet been spent, and intend to borrow abroad via a syndicated loan. There are risks that the fiscal deficit for 2013 will be higher than currently planned, if the authorities fail to implement the spending cuts discussed with the mission. This could lead to a substantial accumulation of arrears and/or reliance on central bank financing. In this regard, staff expressed concern about the recourse to central bank bridge loans, which are intended to assist with cash management but could—if not quickly repaid—constitute central bank financing of the budget. The current fiscal stance is clearly unsustainable. Rating agencies have recently downgraded Zambia’s credit rating, citing sharply deteriorated government finances. Without a change in policies, government debt would rise in net present value from about 30 percent of GDP in 2013 to over 50 percent by 2018, with the debt financing predominantly recurrent expenditures. PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio Fixed-Primary Balance The wage increases took effect September 1, so the full year effect will only be felt in 2014. Source: IMF staff estimates Page 9 Proposed fiscal adjustment over the medim term. Discussions on the 2014 budget took place before the authorities had finalized their plans. Staff advised addressing the fiscal gaps and creating space for spending on infrastructure, health, and education by taking measures to boost domestic revenue and contain the wage bill and other recurrent expenditures. Given the small size of the domestic financial market, in line with earlier staff advice, net domestic financing should not exceed 1½–2 percent of GDP in the medium term, so as not to crowd out private sector credit. In addition, given limited debt management and project assessment and implementation capacities, as well as the limited availability of concessional financing, staff believes reliance on external financing should also be contained and gradually reduced. Thus, staff recommended reducing the fiscal deficit to 5 percent of GDP in 2014, in line with the MTEF approved by Cabinet in September, and gradually to 3 percent of GDP over the medium term. Given the recent fiscal slippages and to anchor the needed fiscal adjustment, staff stressed the importance of adopting, and then following, prudent budgets.   Long-term fiscal anchor. Staff proposed—and the authorities agreed—that fiscal policy should target a roughly unchanged debt to GDP ratio over the medium term. The proposed debt level is moderate but, considering the limited absorptive and debt management capacities, debt-financed additional spending is not recommended to maintain macroeconomic stability. To finance the needed investment in infrastructure, revenue measures are needed in addition to external borrowing. Moreover, maintaining fiscal space will be important given the economy’s dependence on copper and its volatile prices. In light of the expected increases in mining revenue over the medium term, the authorities will need to consider the implications of possible revenue volatility in conducting macroeconomic policy as well as the benefits of introducing a fiscal rule over the medium term. Measures Staff Medium-Term Recommendations: Revenue Revenue measures. Staff encouraged the authorities to accelerate revenue mobilization and cautioned against any narrowing of the tax base. Staff proposed revenue measures of about 2.3 percent of GDP over the medium term through broadening the tax base (text box), based on the recommendations of the recent FAD tax policy mission. The authorities need to continue strengthening mining tax administration. Staff advised against raising the PIT tax free threshold, which the authorities were considering, noting that the threshold is already high at 3 times GNI per capita. The proposed tax measures together with rising mining revenue and improved non-tax revenue collection are expected to raise revenues by 5 percent of GDP over the medium term. Page 10 ZAMBIA     Rationalize the wage bill, which is projected to be 54 percent of domestic revenue in 2014. To mitigate this year’s large wage increase, staff supported the government’s plan to freeze wages in 2014 and 2015 and net recruitment in 2014, and further proposed reducing the wage bill to not more than 35 percent of domestic revenue over the medium term and eventually to not more than 8 percent of GDP. To achieve the medium term target will require very tight wage policy through at least 2016. To enhance budget predictability and contain the wage bill, multi-year wage agreements (for the period after 2015) and civil service reforms will be needed, including a review of staffing levels (Appendix III). In this context, the government has embarked on a multi-year civil service reform program that aims to strengthen the efficiency of the public sector by, among other things, introducing a performance management system, rationalizing the pay scale, and streamlining allowances. Fuel subsidies. Staff welcomed the removal of fuel subsidies and stressed the importance of adopting an automatic pricing mechanism to avoid the recurrence of subsidies and to attract much needed investments in the area. Maize marketing and fertilizer subsidies. Staff supported the authorities’ decision to reduce fertilizer subsidies and fully reflect the Food Reserve Agency’s (FRA) operations in the budget, and urged them to stick to the announced policy of limiting FRA activities to maintaining a modest strategic reserve. Additional reforms to support a larger role for the private sector, including the elimination of export bans, could help boost agricultural output and rural development more generally. Pension system. The Public Service Pension Fund (PSPF) has accumulated pension arrears of an estimated 1.1 percent of GDP, and its annual funding is insufficient to prevent the accumulation of new arrears. Staff supported the government’s intention to reform the system (Box 2), including through increasing the retirement age to 65 from 55 years. In addition, staff strongly supports the proposal to move wage negotiations with civil servants to before, rather than after, budget approval. Page 11 Box 2. Pension Reform The public pension system in Zambia is complicated by the presence of three different schemes: i) the National Pension Scheme Authority (NAPSA), to which all new entrants to the formal sector since 2000 are mandated to contribute, ii) The PSPF for central government workers, and iii) The Local Authorities Superannuation Fund (LASF) for subnational government and public utility workers. The PSPF and LASF have been closed to new entrants since 2000. Moreover, pensions for all three funds are based on ultimately unsustainable benefit rules. And the PSPF and LASF have been running large deficits. The central government has been partially financing the deficit of the PSPF to slow down the pace of arrears accumulation, but the stock of PSPF arrears to pensioners are nevertheless expected to reach 1.1 percent of GDP by end-2013. Supported by the finding of an FAD TA mission, staff recommended near- and medium-term measures to strengthen the sustainability of the pension systems including: i) transferring members of PSPF and LASF to NAPSA, which is currently in surplus, under a dual-benefit system, ii) raising the statutory retirement age from 55 to 65 gradually, (iii) reducing the current bias towards lump sum payments by lowering the commutation rate, introducing penalties for early retirement, and indexing benefits to inflation, (iv) raising the contribution rates of PSPF and LASF workers to the NAPSA rate of 10 percent, (v) strengthening collection capacity within NAPSA. The authorities have announced their intention to put the public pension system on a sustainable footing, including by raising the retirement age to 65. However, the full details and timing of the reform are not yet available.  Capital spending and financing. Staff recommended a more gradual path of increase in capital spending, in light of capacity constraints, and limiting external borrowing for capital projects to what is needed each year rather than issuing a Eurobond adequate to cover the full cost of multi-year investment projects. In the case of the latter, the government must bear additional interest costs, and there will be a risk that the funds will be diverted to lower priority spending. Proposed 2014 budget. Staff stressed that the proposed 2014 budget does not take sufficient steps to start addressing the large fiscal deficit. The budget submitted to Parliament in October calls for a deficit of 6.2 percent of GDP in 2014, above staff’s recommendation of 5 percent. The budget aims to increase domestic revenue by about 1.3 percent of GDP, mainly through nontax measures (including bringing revenue from FRA and other government agencies on budget, raising road tolls, and introducing a surcharge on money transfers). Contrary to staff’s advice, the budget proposes raising the PIT tax-free threshold to K3,000 from the current 2,200, which will generate a revenue loss of about 1 percent of GDP. The budget also proposes a wage freeze for 2014 Under the new PIT tax-free threshold, only about 33 percent of employees in the formal sector are expected to pay income taxes. Page 12 and 2015, as well as a net recruitment freeze for 2014 and limits FRA activities to maintaining a strategic reserve. ZAMBIA In addition to the higher than desirable planned deficit, there are substantial downside risks to the proposed 2014 budget. Based on available information, staff estimates that revenue and spending policies in the budget would produce a deficit of 7.4 percent of GDP, about 1 percent of GDP higher than budgeted. Moreover, the proposed wage and hiring freezes will be difficult to achieve given opposition from unions. Even modest increases in wages and new recruitments could incur additional spending of 1– 1½ percent of GDP. To reduce the proposed deficit to 5 percent of GDP, staff recommended further measures (text box). Refrain from raising the tax-free theshold Starting to raise CIT rates on low-taxed sectors Postponing some infrastructure projections Reducing intergovernmental transfers Staff Recommendations: Fiscal Measures Additional to the 2014 Proposed Budget Gain in Deficit Reduction 1 percent of GDP 0.4 percent of GDP 0.4 percent of GDP 0.3 percent of GDP Authorities’ views. The authorities reiterated their commitment to ensure that the fiscal deficit for 2013 does not go beyond 8.5 percent of GDP. They will cut low-priority spending as needed to meet the deficit projection. Regarding the risks to the 2014 budget, the authorities reaffirmed that the government will stick to the proposed wage and net recruitment freeze and that additional measures will be taken as needed to meet the 2014 deficit target. Starting next year, revenues and expenditures of FRA and other government agencies will be monitored by the Treasury. Across the public sector, steps are being taken to strengthen governance and accountability, including new measures to improve procurement of petroleum and fertilizer. While the authorities have not finalized their medium-term fiscal plans, they broadly agreed with staff’s recommendations to gradually reduce the deficit to 3 percent of GDP, net domestic financing to 1½–2 percent of GDP, and the wage bill to not more than 35 percent of revenues. They did not fully agree with the long-term target of a wage bill less than 8 percent of GDP, noting that the need to hire teachers, health care workers, and agricultural extension workers may make this impossible. In addition, while the authorities agree it will be important to eventually develop a fiscal strategy to insulate the budget from volatile copper revenues, they do not see this The deficit could be significantly higher if the increase in nontax revenue falls short of the authorities’ ambitious projections. The baseline in Tables 2 and 3 assumes a fiscal outcome in 2014 based on the authorities’ planned financing. Over the medium term the baseline assumes that the authorities arrive at their medium-term target of raising tax revenue by around 3 percent of GDP over 2014-18 through the measures recommended by staff, and that recurrent expenditures are contained to levels agreed upon during discussions with a gradual increase in capital spending. For this baseline to hold, the authorities would need to identify additional measures to arrive at their targeted deficit. The attached fiscal tables reflect these medium-term fiscal goals. As the authorities have not yet spelled out all policies required to meet these goals, the tables include a line for fiscal measures yet to be taken. Page 13 as an urgent need, in light of the fact that significant copper tax revenue remains some years in the future.