CROSSROADS Decade of progress. Zambia has achieved high, sustained growth—thanks to strong growth in copper production and prudent macroeconomic policies—and macroeconomic stability over the past decade, supported by two Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangements. During this period, Zambia received debt relief of $5.5 billion. Public debt was just over 30 percent of GDP at end-2012, of which about half was external debt. GDP per capita in PPP terms has almost doubled since 2000. However, poverty remains high (in 2010, an estimated 60.5 percent of the population was living in poverty and 42.3 percent in extreme poverty) and infrastructure needs to be improved substantially (Ex-Post Assessment update, 2011). 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Source: Zambian authorities. Real GDP and CPI (Percent change) Real GDP, rhs CPI Growth and inflation. Output grew 7.2 percent in 2012, supported by strong performance in agriculture, construction, and communication services. Growth is expected to decline to 6 percent in 2013, mainly owing to lower agricultural production. Inflation was slightly above the BOZ target of 7 percent at end-2012, and was 6.9 percent in October 2013, mainly driven by non-food inflation. Fiscal developments . The government conducted fiscal policy prudently in recent years, and the 2013 budget targeted a deficit of 4.1 percent of GDP (broadly consistent with the 2012 Article IV recommendations), with significant increases in capital spending. However, the actual fiscal deficit for 2013 is projected to be roughly double the budgeted level, mainly as a result of significant overspending on recurrent items, primarily subsidies and wages. Spread to Benchmark for Selected Eurobonds (Basis points) Senegal (B+ 1/) External position. The current account was roughly balanced in 2012, but is expected t move into a deficit of 1.3 percent of GDP in 2013, despite rapidly growing non-traditional exports, reflecting lower copper prices and rising imports. FDI has been increasing in recent years, largely in mining. International reserves are increasing slowly, but remain low after sharp declines earlier in 2013. In January- Namibia (BBB- 2/) South Africa (BBB 1/ 2/) Nigeria (BB- 1/ 2/) Zambia (B; B+ until 10/28/13 2/) b F y g S O v D b F y g S O v D b F y g S O v Sources: Bloomberg, Fitch and S&P. 1/ S&P 2/ Fitch Page 6 April 2013, BOZ sold foreign exchange to offset depreciation pressures. The possible tapering of unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. has had little impact on Zambia’s Eurobond yields, but reflecting concerns about the Zambian economy, Zambia’s Eurobond spreads have during 2013 increased more than those of other African countries. Financial sector. The banking sector has grown steadily and remains profitable and well- capitalized. Private sector credit growth has started slowing down in 2013 from a rapid increase in the second half of 2012. Nonperforming loans declined to 8.2 percent of total loans in mid-2013 from 15 percent in 2010. Past advice and recent reform measures. In line with earlier advice, the government recently made progress in structural reforms by curtailing fuel and agricultural subsidies (Box 1) and announcing a pension reform plan that will include an increase the pension age to 65 from 55 years. The authorities have also made progress in improving access to financial services, and the government increased BOZ’s capital substantially. BOZ has proceeded flexibly and gradually with the implementation of the increased capital requirement for banks. However, traction on PFM reforms, including on fiscal reporting and quality control, has been weak and the fiscal situation has deteriorated sharply in 2013. Box 1. Subsidy Reform Subsidies for fuel, maize, and agricultural inputs have in recent years been a source of significant budget overruns in Zambia. During 2010-13, these subsidies averaged close to 3 percent of GDP in total, of which only about one quarter was provided for in the original budgets. Aside from being difficult to manage, the programs have been widely criticized as being excessively costly and not obtaining good value for money. To rein in expenditures and better target those in need, the Zambian government has embarked on a major subsidy reform. Retail fuel prices were raised in May 2013 by an average of almost 22 percent, eliminating a mounting subsidy and generating savings for the government of about 1.2 percent of GDP. Around the same time, Government announced that it would reduce the scale of the Food Reserve Agency’s operations and eliminate the difference between its buying and selling price for maize. Moreover, the price of fertilizer under the Farmer Input Support Program was doubled. While the reforms are still underway and the full savings are yet to be realized, the combined cost of the latter two programs is expected to be reduced to 1.0 percent of GDP in 2014 from 2.2 percent of GDP on average during 2010-13. In addition, starting from the 2014 budget, the authorities have decided to accurately reflect all maize-related activity on budget. Along with the reduction of subsidies, government is scaling up social cash transfers to better assist the poor. The budgeted allocation to such transfers is being increased almost tenfold to K150 million in 2014 (about 0.1 percent of GDP) to provide some 143,000 of the poorest households with about $12 a month. This program will cover approximately 13 percent of those in extreme poverty, and for the average recipient household the transfer should boost consumption by 20 percent and eliminate almost half of the gap to the food poverty line. Government plans to extend the program nationwide over the coming years as delivery capacity is built up. Page 7 Political and business environment . Zambia’s score in the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators has improved over the past decade, largely due to improvements in the ease of getting credit and enforcing contracts (Appendix I). Policymakers, however, have at times taken measures adding to costs of doing business and raising uncertainty about the policy direction. The government banned, in mid-2012, the use of foreign exchange in domestic contracts (creating problems for some externally-funded businesses, although these were reduced by a later exclusion of electricity projects from the ban); BOZ introduced caps on lending rates early this year; and the authorities recently adopted a new regulation to strengthen monitoring of foreign exchange transactions (adding to business costs, albeit limited by subsequent revisions of the regulation). Medium-term outlook. The Zambian economy has high growth potential, with its substantial mineral wealth and largely untapped resources in agriculture, hydropower, and tourism. In light of the significant policy uncertainties, however, the medium-term outlook for growth and inflation is uncertain. Assuming front-loaded fiscal reforms leading to a medium-term deficit of 3 percent of GDP, and a business friendly policy environment, staff projects growth to remain at 7– 8 percent and inflation to decline gradually to 5 percent. The proposed fiscal adjustment together with increased copper production and non-copper exports would improve the current account to roughly balance by 2018. Risks. The balance of risks to growth is on the downside due to the uncertainties regarding the pace of fiscal adjustment and the investment climate. If the needed fiscal adjustment is delayed, the economy would be highly vulnerable to negative shocks, with low international reserves and rapidly rising public debt. In addition, the authorities might have difficulty mobilizing the needed deficit financing (Risk Assessment Matrix). Other risk factors include weather conditions, financial fallout from a reemergence of financial stress in the euro area, and trade and commodity price implications of a slowdown in emerging markets such as China. Greater exchange rate flexibility could help cushion against negative shocks, including disruptions to external financing and worsening of the terms of trade. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of the economy and outlook. They noted that steps had already been taken to contain the fiscal deficit, including by removing the fuel subsidy, and that further strong action would be taken in 2014 and over the medium term. They also emphasized their commitment to maintaining a business friendly environment, noting that the recent steps to tighten regulation were needed to strengthen monitoring of the economy and had already revealed some suspicious business activities.