Address Structural Constraints Background. The authorities are concerned about high lending rates and limited access to credit by SMEs, which prompted the introduction of caps on lending rates (Appendix V). The banking system is highly concentrated, with the top four banks’ assets amounting to about 60 percent of total banking sector assets. The banking system’s loan-to-deposit ratio is low at around 65 percent, indicating that the lack of bankable projects and borrowers is the main reason for limited credit delivery. The overall framework and practices for banking supervision are broadly compliant with the Basel Core Principles (Financial Sector Assessment Program Update, 2009). T/B: 182 days T/B: 364 days BoZ policy rate Treasury Bill Rates and Lending Rate Ceilings (percent) Lending rate ceilings. Staff noted that international experience shows that lending rate ceilings—if they are binding— will distort credit allocation and restrict (rather than enhance) access to credit, particularly for SMEs. Since the lending rate ceilings were introduced early this year, market interest rates (as reflected in average Treasury bill rates) have increased more than two percentage points, while the ceilings have been increased only one half percentage point, making them increasingly binding. Staff advised that to reduce interest rates, efforts should focus on reforms to enhance competition in the banking sector, and help SMEs develop credible business plans. If the authorities are determined to maintain the lending rate ceilings, at the very least it will be important to adjust them in line with market rate increases. One way to achieve this would be to tie the ceiling to the average Treasury bill rate, rather than to the policy rate. Lending rate ceiling for banks Source: Bank of Zambia Apr-12 Apr-13 Oct-12 Oct-13 Jan-13 Jul-12 Jul-13 Zambia: Number of Bank Branches and Agencies Financial inclusion. Staff welcomed the authorities’ continued efforts to enhance financial services delivery by strengthening the Credit Reference Bureau, expanding bank branches in rural areas, and improving credit culture. The planned introduction of a unified collateral registry system, agency banking guidelines, and steps to improve land titling will facilitate credit provision and improve access to financial services particularly in rural areas. Staff noted that, combined, these measures are more likely to Whole country Lusaka June Source: Bank of Zambia. The interest rate caps were initially set at 18.25 percent for banks, 30 percent for non-banks, and 42 percent for microfinance institutions, with the levels tied to the BoZ policy rate. Page 18 ZAMBIA contribute to a reduced cost of loans for SMEs than the lending rate cap. Banks’ new capital requirement . To strengthen the balance sheets of banks, the authorities increased the minimum capital requirement. All but a few small banks are expected to meet the new requirements by the end of 2013. Given the rapid increase in private sector credit in the second half of 2012 and the new higher bank capital, staff supported the BOZ’s intensive banking supervision to assess a potential build-up in vulnerability and risks to financial stability. Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that private sector credit has continued to increase since the introduction of the lending rate ceilings and that the nonbank sector is being restructured, including by marginal and inefficient nonbanks’ exit from the market. They indicated that BOZ is carefully monitoring developments in bank and nonbank lending, and has also asked a foreign consultant to conduct an in-depth study of the impact of the lending rate ceilings. The authorities noted financial inclusion as a policy priority. Given limited financial system infrastructure in Zambia, agent banking is being pursued as a low cost solution, particularly in rural areas.