Planning and Maintain Debt Sustainability Developments. Given infrastructure needs, the government is ramping up capital spending on roads, railways, and power over the medium term. With limited donor support, Zambia has begun tapping the Eurobond market to x d I ) g v ( s f I South Africa Rwanda Ghana Ethiopia Uganda Tanzania Mozambique Nigeria Angola Government capital expenditure in percent of GDP Sources: World Economic Forum; WEO; and IMF staff calculations. (2006-2011 Average) Page 14 ZAMBIA finance needed infrastructure. Selected municipalities and SOEs have proposed issuing sub-national Eurobonds totaling $4.5 billion (over 20 percent of 2012 GDP). Such issuances would likely require government guarantees. Staff supported the Minister’s opposition to the proposed sub-national Eurobonds and advised that, to the extent these projects are of national importance, it would be preferable to issue sovereign bonds, which should be budgeted and on lent to sub-national entities with proper monitoring. Any such borrowing should also be in line with (i) macroeconomic stability and fiscal/debt sustainability; (ii) project appraisal, management and monitoring capacity; and (iii) debt management capacity and strategy. In this regard, staff encouraged the authorities to request a voluntary update of the Debt Management Performance Assessment (DEMPA) conducted in 2011, as well as to request TA from the World Bank to assist in finalizing their medium-term debt strategy. Debt sustainability analysis (DSA). Zambia’s external and public debt remains relatively low, and an updated DSA based on the authorities’ planned fiscal adjustment scenario continues to indicate a low risk of debt stress, despite higher borrowing envisaged than in the previous DSA (Attachment). Absent adjustment, however, the debt ratio would rise sharply, with the fixed primary fiscal balance scenario demonstrating clearly the need for fiscal adjustment. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s recommendations on the proposed sub-national Eurobonds as well as with the DSA results. They indicated that, to strengthen debt management, the International Debt Management Department will be restructured in tandem with a restructuring of the Ministry of Finance and stressed that Zambia will not fall into another debt trap, after receiving large debt relief in the 2000s.