Background. Over the last decade, Zambia’s competitiveness has been boosted by strengthened macroeconomic fundamentals and a supportive business environment. Zambia’s business environment remains favorable compared to other countries in the region, but weaknesses in infrastructure and human capital as well as the recently more interventionist regulatory approach and related uncertainty about the policy direction are impediments to continued progress. Moreover, while non-copper exports have increased rapidly in recent years, the country remains reliant on copper exports. To secure continued growth and diversification, Zambia will need to boost infrastructure and education, while maintaining a business friendly environment that inspires investor confidence (2012/13 and private sector unless otherwise noted) Minimum Wages Zambia (public sector from September, 2013) C P D G v g W m m Mozambique Kenya Tanzania Malawi Cambodia Senegal Bangladesh Zambia (2011) Indonesia &Vietnam China Minimum wages. A sharp increase in 2012 brought the minimum wage in Zambia to about 1½ times per capita GDP. The private sector and NGOs noted that the high minimum wage is hampering the country’s competitiveness and formal employment. Moreover, Minimum Wage in US$ Sources: U.S. Department of Labor and WageIndicators.org. The capital requirement was increased in 2012 from $2.4 million to $20 million for locally owned banks and to $100 million for foreign-owned banks, but banks have been given to end-2013 to meet the new requirement. The minimum wage law applies to the formal private sector, and sets different minimums for different job categories, including domestics, shopkeepers, and general workers. In the public sector, the lowest wage paid is much higher than specified in the minimum wage law. Page 19 some in government are considering pressuring private companies to match the new government minimum wage, which is roughly 4½ times per capita GDP and 2½ times the current minimum wage in the private sector. Minimum wages of this magnitude would inhibit job creation by driving many employers out of business and resulting in a sharp decline in both domestic and foreign investments. It could also lead to further reliance on informal sector jobs, where workers have less protection. Authorities’ views. The authorities stressed that the government is ramping up capital spending on infrastructure to address key impediments to inclusive growth and competitiveness. They noted that the 2012 increase in the statutory minimum wage had been overdue as it had not been adjusted between 2006 and 2011, but also that views by some officials on extending the new government minimum to the private sector or introducing sector-based differentiation were their personal views, not the government’s.