Developments. Inflation has in recent months remained at around 7 percent, above the BOZ’s end-2013 target of 6 percent, reflecting the removal of fuel subsidies, and inflationary pressure is expected to rise due to the large civil servant wage increases and reduction of maize subsidies. Following the elimination of fuel and maize subsidies, the BOZ increased the policy rate twice (25 bps each time) to 9.75 percent to contain inflationary pressure. Bank liquidity has been highly volatile. The BOZ has been under political pressure to lower lending rates and strengthen the kwacha. Zambia’s maiden sovereign bond issue in September 2012 was a 10-year dollar-denominated bond, in the amount of $750m (initially $500 million). Orders for the offer amounted to some $12 billion, allowing the country to price the bond at a yield of just 5.625 percent. Food comprises 53 percent of Zambia’s consumer price index basket so the BOZ uses headline inflation as its inflation target while monitoring food and non-food inflation developments. The policy rate was introduced in April 2012 to replace reserve money targeting as BOZ’s main monetary policy tool. Page 15 Monetary policy framework . Staff welcomed the progress that the BOZ has made in transitioning from conducting monetary policy through targeting reserve money to conducting policy through the policy rate. However, more needs to be done, including strengthening understanding of the interest rate transmission mechanism, improving liquidity forecasting and management, and developing high frequency indicators of economic activity. Pending further progress in these areas, staff supported the BOZ’s intention to increasingly conduct monetary policy through the policy rate, while nonetheless seeking to keep reserve money and bank liquidity in check. Staff encouraged the BOZ to narrow the 400 basis point corridor in which the BOZ targets the interbank rate to strengthen the policy rate’s role as a benchmark for the pricing of longer-term and customer transactions. Policy Rate and Overnight Interbank Rate (In percent) Simple Average Overnight Rate Corridor-high Corridor - low Policy rate Source: Bank of Zambia. Oct-12 Apr-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Apr-13 Jul-13 Consumer Prices (year-on-year percent change) Petroleum Products Food Other Non-Food Overall Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Source: Zambian authorities. Monetary policy stance . The significant fiscal policy changes this year greatly complicate the BOZ’s task of controlling inflation. Staff supported the authorities’ intention to implicitly increase their inflation target for end-2013 to 7.5 percent to accommodate the first round effects of the removal of fuel and maize subsidies (estimated at 1– 1½ percentage points). Staff emphasized the importance of continuing to tighten monetary policy, in order to resist the second round effects of the removal of subsidies and the inflationary pressure from the large civil servant wage increases. International reserves and exchange rates. The BOZ has started building up reserves slowly as the kwacha had appreciated in recent months, after losing reserves rapidly early this year during a brief (now ended) period of providing foreign exchange to finance oil imports. Given the economy’s vulnerability to negative shocks and the current low level of reserves (an estimate of 2.3 International Reserves (US$ Millions) International reserves 1/ Kwacha per US$, rhs y S v y S v y S v Source: Bank of Zambia. 1/ Unencumbered reserves only. Page 16 ZAMBIA months of imports for 2013), staff advised the BOZ to allow more exchange rate flexibility and to continue to build up reserves in line with their medium-term target of 4 months of imports, using reserves to offset temporary exchange rate movements, but not to resist sustained depreciation pressures when they exist. Staff analysis suggested that the kwacha remains broadly in line with fundamentals (Appendix IV). Exchange restrictions. The authorities amended the BOZ Act and introduced new foreign exchange market regulations to strengthen monitoring of external transactions. LEG had judged that the initial version of the regulation on foreign exchange transactions violated Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement:  On June 25, 2013, the Zambian authorities issued Statutory Instrument 55 of 2013, which regulates the monitoring of foreign exchange transactions and includes two measures that give rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a). The first exchange restriction arises from the requirement that a person making payments of dividends in foreign exchange provide a tax clearance certificate and evidence of payment of corporate or income tax. The second exchange restriction arises from the requirement that payments for royalties, management fees, technical fees, commissions or consultancy fees in foreign exchange be accompanied by evidence of corporate tax payments. Both measures give rise to exchange restrictions subject to IMF approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) because they impose limitations on the availability of foreign exchange for the making of payments of current international transactions based on noncompliance with obligations that are unrelated to the proposed transaction. The authorities have been working closely with the Fund staff to eliminate the exchange restrictions in the regulation , while maintaining their goal of strengthened monitoring. It is expected that the authorities will amend the regulation to be compliant with Article VIII before the Board meeting. Authorities’ views. The BOZ acknowledged that moving to a policy rate-based regime is a transitional process. They noted that, utilizing the ongoing Norway/MCM TA, the BOZ will continue to develop all the structures necessary for the effective functioning of the policy rate as the main monetary policy tool. To improve liquidity forecasting, the BOZ plans to work together with the government to enhance the flow of information on government transactions. The BOZ stressed that to avoid a wage-price spiral, they are prepared to act to offset inflationary pressures from the large civil service wage increase, and noted the recent increase in BOZ’s budget for open market operations. The authorities agreed with the exchange rate assessment and acknowledged the need to further build up international reserves, but noted that they are reluctant to do so when the kwacha is depreciating. Page 17