Developments. The recent PEFA assessment found a deterioration in PFM, including reporting and quality control. Procurement practices have also deteriorated, with single-source contracts for some large projects. While the rollout of the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) has continued, its implementation, as well as that of the Treasury Single Account (TSA), has been weak, and only release-based fiscal data are available. In addition, consolidation of financing data with the BOZ needs to be improved. Staff stressed the importance of stepping up PFM reform to support fiscal consolidation and improve budget planning and implementation. Staff underlined the importance of (i) enhancing budget credibility and consistency between the National Development Plan, Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, and annual budget; (ii) improving fiscal data as well as forecasts by enhancing the macro fiscal framework; (iii) expanding the coverage of the TSA by closing line ministries’ accounts at commercial banks; (iv) improving collaboration between units at the Ministry of Finance, and with the BOZ, to produce fiscal data based on expenditures rather than releases; (v) strengthening IFMIS implementation and controls; and (vi) providing additional resources to the Accountant General’s Department to support these reforms. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed with the need to improve cash management and improve collaboration across ministry units and with the BOZ. They noted that, with TA from donors, they will be refocusing efforts in this area and have recently adopted a new PFM reform strategy. Progress has been slow in implementing the multi-donor funded Public Expenditure Management and Accountability (PEMFA) program prepared in 2010. They indicated that the recommendations of the November 2013 FAD mission will be used to further develop the reform program, including prioritization and sequencing, and will inform further strategic discussions with donors on support for PFM reform. Infrastructure and government spending