Growth is projected to be sluggish over the short to medium term (Figure 9). A comprehensive and determined reform program would be necessary to foster investment, especially foreign, and boost productivity beyond the baseline. Given the weak momentum coming out of 2013, it is hard to see a vigorous economic recovery in 2014. Agricultural and mining exports are projected to accelerate in 2014, due to another strong tobacco season and increased output of gold and platinum. This will offset the continued shrinking of the industrial sector, under pressure from competing imports from South Africa. (A key fact is that, despite the status of the South African rand as legal tender under the multi-currency regime, labor contracts in Zimbabwe are universally denominated in U.S. dollars.) The current account balance should improve over the medium term as export capacity increases, but the current account deficit is expected to remain high, averaging around 15 percent of GDP in the medium term. Fiscal consolidation should permit a modest re- building of international reserves. Inflation is projected to remain very low during 2014 (0.2 percent), picking up to 1.2 percent in 2015. The withholding has been suspended until further consultations with mining companies are completed. Page 11 Box 1. Zimbabwe: Deflation Risks Zimbabwe’s 12-month inflation rate decelerated from 2.9 percent at end-2012 to -0.3 percent in April 2014. The deceleration is partly driven by weak aggregate demand. A closer inspection of CPI components indicates that deflationary pressures have been stronger in traded sectors (Box Figure 1), suggesting that pass-through from a depreciating rand also plays an important role. There are benefits and costs from deflation for Zimbabwe. On the upside, temporarily falling prices benefit consumers with job security. By delivering a boost to aggregate demand, falling prices may contribute to eroding the country’s negative output gap. Deflation could also correct the existing overvaluation in the real exchange rate, although that would require prices of non-traded inputs (notably labor) and final goods to fall faster than the prices of traded goods, which has not been the case so far. Finally, falling prices boost the real money supply and could alleviate somewhat the persistent liquidity shortages. On the downside, persistent deflation may increase the real burden of existing debt in a country that is already under financial stress. However, Zimbabwe’s financial underdevelopment (low stocks of loans and deposits, with short maturities) may mitigate this effect. Deflation hurts producers and might reduce Zimbabwe’s productive capacity, if it leads to widespread company downsizing and closures, given downward wage rigidity. In the medium term, structural reforms that improve the business environment and stimulate domestic and foreign investment could offset the deflationary impulse. In the near term, in the absence of monetary policy tools, the authorities must avoid exacerbating the distortions and imbalances, for example, by resisting the impulse to restrict imports and by avoiding further public sector wage increases, which put pressure on salary negotiations elsewhere in the economy. Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix, Table 7). The most immediate risk is failure to set government finances on a sustainable path. Absent measures to re-prioritize government spending, vital government functions could suffer and stability may be jeopardized. Significant uncertainty still surrounds the implementation of the indigenization policy, which has a chilling effect on foreign investment. While the rhetoric on this issue has been toned down somewhat and a new approach has been mooted, it is still not clear what this will imply outside the extractive sectors, as a case-by-case approach seems to be the government’s preferred choice. Financial sector vulnerabilities and adverse weather conditions present other significant domestic risks. A protracted period of lower growth in advanced and emerging economies (particularly Europe and China) could lower global demand for key mineral exports (gold, platinum, diamonds) and dampen growth. Real spillovers from South Africa are unlikely to be significant, although persistent weakness in the rand would hurt Zimbabwean light manufacturing, already under stress. There are also risks of sustained deflation in Zimbabwe (Box 1). US$/Rand Exchange Rate CPI Traded CPI Non-traded Sources: Zimbabwean authorities and IMF staff estimates. Box Figure 1. Zimbabwe: Consumer Price Index by Category, January 2009-March 2014 (Index, June 2009=100) Page 12 The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s medium-term outlook and risk assessment. However, the authorities remained confident that the timely and full implementation of ZIM ASSET, their development blueprint for the next five years, could result in better growth prospects over the medium term. The authorities expressed their commitment to set government finances on a sustainable footing, implement financial sector reforms, and clarify their indigenization and empowerment policy. They reaffirmed their commitment to continued engagement with the IFIs and their interest in a successor SMP.