The staff emphasized that fiscal policy in the medium term should be guided by the objective to rebalance expenditures from wages to capital and social spending. Zimbabwe’s public sector wage bill is among the highest in the region (Annex V), and accounts for a disproportionately large share of the budget. The growth in employment costs reflects large wage increases and expansion of the civil service. Zimbabwe’s tax collection as a share of GDP is high by Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) standard. Thus, efforts should focus on improving the efficiency of tax administration, rather than increasing tax pressure. Non-wage expenditures have suffered from years of compression and could lead to widening gaps in infrastructure and social development, if not addressed. Staff’s baseline medium-term projections are predicated on a slight increase of spending in proportion of GDP, accompanied by a marked redistribution of spending from wages to capital and high-priority current outlays (Figure 2). The authorities agreed that reducing the large public sector wage bill should be a key objective for achieving fiscal and debt sustainability over the medium term. In the adjustment scenario, the authorities plan to reduce wage costs from around 66 percent of expenditure in 2016 to 50 percent in 2019 (see section E). To achieve these reductions, the authorities aim to maintain total wage costs unchanged in nominal terms until 2019. In addition, they plan to implement the payroll audits of all service commissions and review allowances with the goal of identifying efficiency gains and cost savings. The authorities concurred that the fiscal space thus created could be used to increase development and social spending. The authorities concurred that increasing transparency and accountability in the diamond sector, as well as its contribution to fiscal resources, is key. The sector was managed poorly and the lack of transparency and accountability led to a situation where it did not generate any dividends for the budget. In a bid to address this issue, the government put forward a proposal for the setting up of the Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Company (ZCDC), following the Botswana model, and consolidated all diamond operations in a new entity. The negotiations Employment costs include, in addition to the wage bill of the central government, pension payments and wage transfers to other levels of government. Wage costs include the wage bill of the central government and wage transfers to other levels of government. A tax policy mission is expected in the first half of 2016. In addition to the audit finalized by the Public Service Commission, covering about 50 percent of public employment, Cabinet has requested the other commissions (Judicial; Uniformed Services; and Health Service Board) to perform audits and propose recommendations to rationalize employment. The seven companies previously operating in the sector are Marange Resources, Mbada Diamonds, Anjin Resources, Diamond Mining Company, Gyne Nyame, Kusena, and Jinan. Page 17 between the authorities and the diamond firms were, however, not successful. Therefore the authorities went ahead, not renewing mining licenses, and have since commenced mining operations. Private companies can participate subject to the indigenization policy. The government intends to fully account for production, sales, turnover, exports, and profits, thus ensuring transparency and accountability in the sector and that proceeds from diamond mining are accrued to the budget. To underscore their commitment to transparency, they will regularly publish the audited accounts of ZCDC. The authorities are making progress in strengthening PFM, supported by development partners. Work is underway, with World Bank’s assistance, on a PFM enhancement project to , inter alia , support: (a) strengthening expenditure controls and internal audit; and (b) pilot rollout of the IFMIS to the local authorities. To help improve expenditure prioritization, the authorities have rolled out pilot program-based budgeting (PBB) on a phased-basis in the ministries of Public Administration, Health, Education, and Social Welfare. PBB is to be rolled out to all ministries over the next two years. The Public Procurement Bill is undergoing extensive consultations with local authorities and accountability organizations with the objective of fast-tracking its submission to parliament. The authorities agree that there is limited scope to raise the tax-to-GDP ratio. However, they see considerable scope to increase efficiency of tax policy and revenue administration. In tax policy, they intend to review the design of their tax system, in particular their VAT. Tax administration efforts will focus on improving the efficiency of crucial operations. ZIMRA’s reform priorities focus on strengthening risk management, taxpayer filing and compliance, and monitoring of transit traffic. Staff agreed that these are priority areas to increase efficiencies in administrative processes and mitigate evasion, and have the potential to generate substantial revenue, at little additional cost and minimal administrative disruption. Staff emphasized the importance to accelerate the reform of SOEs to reduce their budgetary impact, improve service delivery and accountability, and enhance their contribution to economic growth. Forensic and performance audits are being conducted on most of the ten largest SOEs targeted for priority action to determine the appropriate restructuring policies, and employments costs have already been reduced in a number of them. For some of the 10 enterprises targeted for priority action, the authorities plan to seek strategic and technical partners, pursue joint ventures, or unbundle them. The concluded forensic and performance audits (Grain Marketing Board and Cold Storage Company), and the four turnaround strategies under consideration by Cabinet (Industrial Development Corporation, Zimbabwe National Water Authority, Reporting arrangements have been established. The authorities already started to receive daily updates on production figures. The Bill is designed to increase efficiency and enhance transparency and good governance in public procurement by decentralizing the procurement process, reduce the misuse of public resources, and transform the State Procurement Board into two separate entities for regulation and oversight. Page 18 Agriculture and Rural Development Authority, and TelOne) will provide the baseline for appropriate restructuring policies. The authorities reiterated their firm commitment to accelerate SOE reforms. While acknowledging that progress in SOE reforms has not been as fast as they initially hoped, the authorities noted that performing due diligence and designing and implementing reform strategies for each company takes time. They also noted that they succeeded in reducing employment in several SOEs, including at the Grain Marketing Board, TelOne, and National Railways. Strengthening debt management capacity is a priority for the authorities. In line with the Debt Management Act, a unified, up-to-date debt registry will be established in the Debt Management Unit, which would provide complete data about both foreign and local debts from a single record. Such registry will be integrated with other functions in the ministry—e.g., budget preparation and execution. The authorities plan to produce debt management strategy that is fully integrated in the medium term budgeting process. Fund technical assistance is already being provided to the authorities to operationalize their plans.