Zimbabwe’s economic difficulties have deepened. GDP growth slowed significantly to 1.1 percent in 2015, mainly because of the impact of adverse weather conditions on agricultural output, and power generation (Table 1). The mining sector, which has been hit by low commodity prices, erratic power supply, and policy uncertainties, recovered somewhat because of increased gold production. Meanwhile, significant investment is needed to transition from extracting alluvial diamonds to kimberlitic deposits. Growth is projected to remain subdued in 2016, despite strong performance in mining—which is expected to benefit from increases in gold, platinum, and diamond output—construction, and financial services. Tight liquidity conditions stemming from inadequate external inflows, and lower commodity prices continued to hurt economic activity. Unemployment is rising (Annex II), and employment has been shifting to the informal sector. Inflation remained in negative territory, because of the appreciating U.S. dollar—the country’s currency—and lower commodity prices, but this price adjustment has had only limited impact on competitiveness. The current account balance improved in 2015, because of lower prices for oil imports, subdued economic activity, and fiscal consolidation efforts (Table 2). The current account deficit will likely worsen in 2016, despite improving terms of trade, because the drought has raised the need for substantial maize imports. The levels of international reserves remain low, and Zimbabwe remains in debt distress. Fiscal performance in 2015 was better than programmed, despite the adverse macroeconomic environment. Tax revenue benefitted from strong collection efforts on overdue payments and court decisions at year end in favor of the revenue authority (ZIMRA) that offset the impact of slower-than-anticipated growth, increased unemployment, reduced profitability, and lower commodity prices. On the expenditure side, the authorities kept employment costs well below budgetary projections—for the second year in a row—and saved on capital outlays, while protecting social spending. As a result, the primary cash deficit was lower than programmed (Table 3). Alluvial deposits are found on shallow soft ground while kimberlitic diamonds are found deep in the soil. The latter are more expensive to extract and require specialized machinery to break through hard strata F b l O N v F b l O N v F b l O N v All items Food Non-food US$/Rand (RHS) Consumer Price Index (2012 = 100) Sources: Zimbabwe authorities,South African authorities, and IMF staff projections Agriculture, hunting and fishingMining and quarryingManufacturingFinancial institutions and real estateConstructionDistribution, hotels and restaurantsOthers I G P Contribution to Real GDP Growth (Excluding taxes and subsidies) 2015Sources: Zimbabwe authorities and IMF staff projections Page 11 Despite spending pressures to mitigate the impact of the drought, the authorities remain committed to fiscal discipline, and target a primary cash deficit of 0.2 percent of GDP for 2016. Additional spending to provide maize to the poor and the vulnerable groups of the population (0.5 percent of GDP) is to be offset by lower allocation for non-priority current outlays. To generate additional resources, and restore the financial viability of the public service pension system, the authorities have re-established withholding of social security contributions —resulting in an increase in non-tax revenue, and adopted measures to broaden the tax base. The authorities have started to implement measures to rationalize public expenditure and reduce public employment costs. In line with the recently completed civil service audit, they have started to eliminate duplications and redundancies, rationalize posts, revise leave policy in the education sector, reduce employment costs to grant-aided institutions, and cuts to government top-ups to teachers in private schools. Deposit growth in the banking sector continued to slow in 2015, constrained by the weak economy (Table 5). Domestic credit recorded a marked increase in 2015, driven by higher lending to the central government—the majority being debt issued to recapitalize the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) and other public institutions, financing the asset management company (ZAMCO) and addressing legacy debt obligations. In addition to direct purchases, financial institutions have increased their holdings of government securities through purchases on the secondary market, particularly from corporates and individuals who acquired them as part of the government’s clean-up of legacy debt obligations. Credit to the private sector declined by 2 percent, reflecting the combined effects of the weak economy, tight liquidity conditions, and banks’ cautious approach to lending to the private sector. Deposit and credit growth is expected to benefit from the financial sectors reforms and implementation of the financial inclusion strategy (¶30–31). The authorities remain committed to the multi-currency regime. While they acknowledge the costly constraints this regime imposes on macroeconomic policy, they do not see any feasible alternative in the short-to-medium term. To provide credibility to the multicurrency system, and promote consumer and business confidence, the RBZ undertook a three-month demonetization process (June-September 2015), effectively removing the legal status of the Zimbabwe dollar. The process addressed cash held by the public, and non-loan bank accounts as at end-2008. Some US$9 million was converted during the period. There was increased demand for the Following hyperinflation, the authorities had stopped withholding public employees’ social security contributions. The 2016 budget includes 0.7 percent of GDP in additional revenue as a result of this measure. These include: reducing: (a) the list of persons and organizations entitled to tax exemptions; (b) the list of VAT-exempt items; and (c) travelers’ rebate on good imported at customs. To reduce undervaluation and evasion of revenue at customs, pre-shipment inspections became operational on March 1, 2016. Implementation of some of these measures started in November 2015: e.g., rationalizing posts in several government units, cutting government support to teachers in private schools, and reviewing vacation leave in the education sector. In the absence of these measures, the wage bill would be around 1 percentage point of GDP higher in 2016. Page 12 bond coins as consumers switched from the depreciating rand coins. At end-December 2015, bond coins in circulation stood at US$10 million. The introduction of the coins has helped in correcting the pricing of goods and services. Zimbabwe’s social indicators have improved in recent years, but other major development challenges remain (Annex II). The authorities, with support from the World Bank and other development partners, are undertaking a number of initiatives to address these challenges. Preparation of an interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, and a Poverty, Income, Consumption, and Expenditure Survey (PICES) are underway. Zimbabwe, like the rest of the region, is grappling with the El Niño-induced conditions. Drought, erratic rains, and increasing temperatures have reduced agriculture output and livestock, and disrupted hydropower production and water supplies. Due to the severe drought and poor harvest, particularly for the staple food maize, an estimated 3 million people (about 30 percent of rural population) are at risk of food insecurity. The authorities are working with development partners and the private sector to help mitigate the impact, and secure sufficient maize imports (Box 1). Since December 2014, the RBZ introduced 1, 5, 25 and 50 cent bond coins, indexed at par to the U.S. dollar and backed by a US$50 million bond facility. Prior to the introduction, the rand coins were widely used since the adoption of the multi-currency regime system. World Food Program. Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49) Source:World Development Indicators Zimbabwe: SelectedSocial Indicators Life expectancy at birth, total (years) Infant Mortality rate, per 1,000 live births Child Mortality rate, per 1,000 live births Credit Growth Deposit (M3) growth Loans and Deposits (percent)Sources:Zimbabwean authorities and IMF staff estimates. Long-Term (>30 days) Savings Demand Deposits (< 30 days) Short-Term Compositionof Banking Sector Deposits (percent of total, as of November 2015)Source: Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe Monetary Policy Statement Page 13 The economic outlook remains challenging, as El Niño-induced drought is already severely affecting another agricultural harvest season and the energy sector. Given the outlook for the global economy, projections under the baseline scenario are for growth to average 4 percent over the medium term (Figure 2), well below the level that would be needed to ensure sustainable development and reduce poverty. Inflation is projected to remain in negative territory in 2016, but pick up over the medium term. The current account deficit is expected to narrow, but remain high over the medium term, financed mainly by offshore loans to the private sector. The persistent large current account deficits, exacerbated by a sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar, have worsened Zimbabwe’s external position and competitiveness. Zimbabwe will need to improve its competitiveness by facilitating further relative wage and price adjustments while creating fiscal space. In the medium term reforms aimed at removing structural impediments and strengthening institutions to create a supportive business environment will be needed to restore external stability and increase resilience to external shocks (Annex III). Risks to the already difficult outlook stem mainly from continued adverse weather conditions, fiscal challenges, weak commodity prices, and policy implementation in a difficult political environment. (Annex I, Risk Assessment Matrix). The projections are subject to macroeconomic and policy risks. Should external shocks intensify, macroeconomic conditions would deteriorate further and jeopardize the revenue targets. Timely implementation of the measures to curb the wage bill and continued progress in State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) reforms and wage restraint would be needed to lower employments costs. Failure by the authorities to effectively implement their reform agenda or delays in advancing their arrears clearance strategy could undermine their efforts to attract much-needed foreign investment to transform the economy, and to normalize relations with the international community. The authorities shared the staffs’ views on the medium-term outlook and risk assessment. They emphasized that the major economic challenges facing Zimbabwe emanate from exogenous shocks—El Niño-induced drought, low commodity prices, and the appreciating U.S. dollar—exacerbated by inadequate external flows and tight liquidity, erratic power supply, and the economic slowdown. In the near-term, they will have to accommodate additional spending to help mitigate the impact of the devastating drought on the vulnerable population. The staff underscored the urgent need to move forward with comprehensive reforms to transform the economy. The authorities concurred with the staff’s macroeconomic outlook and assessment of risks. They noted, however, that the absence of external financial support magnifies risks and their impact, and generates resistance to reforms. They believe that a successful re-engagement with the international financial community would be a necessary condition to reduce the impact of domestic and exogenous risks. Growth in 2017 is higher than trend, mainly reflecting the rebound in agriculture, following two years (2015–2016) of below-average rain and output. Page 14 Box 1. Zimbabwe: The Impact of El Niño on Zimbabwe Zimbabwe is experiencing its worst drought since 1991–92. El Niño has led to far below-average rainfall across Southern Africa, and projections are for a continuation of below-average rainfall, and above-average temperatures. The situation in Zimbabwe is exacerbated as the country already experienced a poor 2014/15 agricultural season with dry spells in most regions. The agricultural and electricity sectors have been hit hard, with broader spillovers on the economy . The 2015/16 season is expected to see agricultural output shrink by 9.9 percent following an already poor 2014/15 season. The contribution to growth is projected to decline to -1.3 percent in 2016, relative to -0.7 percent in 2015. The Kariba dam, which provides about 60 percent of peak electricity demand, is operating at around 50 percent of its capacity and risks a complete shutdown, if water levels decrease further. Faced with declining agricultural output and inadequate maize reserves, Zimbabwe will have to import an estimated 1.4 million tons of grain until the 2016/17 harvest season. The humanitarian cost of the drought is rising, with an estimated 3 million people facing food insecurity. Rain dependent farmers have been hit hardest. Cattle and other livestock have been decimated, in a context of declining prices (as farmers are destocking). The Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZIMVAC) Rapid Assessment Report of February 2016 estimates food insecurity to double relative to 2014/15, with 30 percent of the rural population now at risk. The household food security status is threatened further by other shocks to households’ disposable incomes, including diminished opportunities for casual labour, particularly in agriculture, declining remittances due to depreciation of regional currencies, and reduced formal employment. Weaknesses in procurement and distribution chains increase the risk of large food price increases—which have not yet materialized—which would disproportionately affect the poor and contribute to increased vulnerability. The authorities have declared a state of national disaster, with estimated total needs assessed at US$1.5 billion. This would cover: (a) grain importation of 1.4 million metric tons (mostly by the private sector); (b) food security and social protection to vulnerable people; (c) livestock support to limit livestock destocking; (d) wildlife support; (v) emergency irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation; (e) health-micro nutrient/ under five feeding; and (f) school feeding. These identified financing needs constitute a call for funding. The major portion of the requirement is expected to be met by the private sector, development partners and individual initiatives. Direct government interventions will focus on mitigating the impact on the 3 million vulnerable people. In addition to budget allocations for food imports and social intervention, an additional 0.5 percent of GDP has been budgeted for this. Enhancing resilience will require reversing the reduced preparedness and response capacity. The ability of the irrigation system to mitigate the impact of droughts has been eroded over time due to underinvestment and limited maintenance. Additionally, financing constraints exacerbated by a lack of collateral continue to hinder agriculture financing. With an increase in rural–urban migration, increasing unemployment and evidence of increasing urban poverty, there is need for policy interventions in urban areas. These could be improved access to affordable cereals and feeding programmes. Concerns have also been raised over the efficiency in procurement and distribution of food. Opening borders for food imports, ensuring that all critical facets of food, water and drugs, are adequately covered to prevent further deterioration of livestock condition and deaths would curb food insecurity. Going forward, diversification of the economy, while making the agricultural sector more resilient, remains key to reduce the country’s vulnerabilities. The agricultural sector has become increasingly vulnerable to water shortages—and this is likely to persist without investment in irrigation and investments that increase agricultural productivity, including by focusing on crops more resilient to water shortages. Additionally, diversifying the economy towards manufacturing not related to agriculture and services will aid to improve resilience to droughts. This requires continued emphasis on tackling some of the factors hindering the emergence of businesses that could drive non- commodity exports. Proportion of Food Insecure Population2/ January -March.Source: ZIMVAC Food Insecure Population During Peak Hunger Period Page 15