Zimbabwe’s strategy to normalize relations with the international community is advancing. The authorities are pursuing a gradual, step-by-step approach to the reengagement process. They view their performance under the SMP as key to establish a track record toward normalizing relations with creditors. Based on this approach, clearing arrears to the IFIs is seen as a first step toward eventually seeking debt treatment under the Paris Club. The persistence of external arrears has exacerbated the liquidity constraint on Zimbabwe’s economy. Eliminating such arrears would allow increased external inflows to finance the authorities’ development plans and private sector-led growth. To this end, the authorities have developed a strategy, which staff welcomes, to clear its external arrears to the IFIs through: a) bridge financing from Afrieximbank to repay arrears to the AfDB, the African Development Fund, and IDA; b) a long-term loan from a bilateral creditor to repay the IBRD; and c) use of SDR holdings to clear the arrears to the Fund. This strategy and the authorities’ reform plans going forward received support from creditors and development partners during the Lima meetings and, if implemented, should provide positive signals to investors and creditors, and help unlock external flows. The World Bank’s management recently agreed for their private sector arm—the International Finance Corporation (IFC)—to prepare proposals for possible investments in Zimbabwe This information, together with the detailed Strategy for Clearing External Arrears and Supportive Economic Reform Measures , as well as the RBZ Governor presentation in Lima, can be found in the home page of the RBZ, at www.rbz.co.zw . At the time of the presentation of the strategy in Lima, the bridge financing amounted to US$819 million, the long-term loan from a bilateral creditor amounted to US$896 million, and the use of SDR holdingss amounted to US$110 million. Paris Club Non-Paris Club IFIs Other multilaterals RBZ short-term debt Sources: Zimbabwe authorities and IMF staff estimates. Structure of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt, 2015 Page 23 that could be reviewed by its management over the coming months. The authorities have indicated that they are planning to work toward requesting a debt treatment under the Paris Club (representing 44 percent of their public and publicly-guaranteed debt), following the repayment of arrears to the IFIs. The authorities plan to eventually seek Fund-financial support for an ambitious medium-term program, a necessary step to seek debt treatment under the Paris Club. The timing of these steps will be decided by the authorities on the basis of their capacity to build support for full reengagement. Zimbabwe continues to make efforts to cooperate with the Fund on policies and payments, and to make good use of technical assistance (TA). They continue to make the agreed $150,000 monthly payment to the PRGT, the increased pari passu payments to the World Bank and AfDB, and token payments to the European Investment Bank. The authorities have committed to increase payments to the IFIs as their payment capacity increases. Zimbabwe continues to benefit from targeted Fund TA to address policy challenges, strengthen institutional capacity, and support its ongoing reform efforts.