ADVANCING THE FISCAL REFORM AGENDA The 2014 budget targets are in doubt in the context of the weaker economic forecast and wage pressures. The target for total revenue in the 2014 budget statement (US$4,120 million or 30.6 percent of GDP, including US$96 million in diamond dividends) is at risk following weak revenue performance in Q1 and the downward revision in growth projections for 2014. The agreed 14 percent increase to the overall wage bill is another source of stress to the budget. Finally, the need to rebuild depleted government deposits, amortize domestic and selected external debt, and modestly increase international reserves all raise the government’s gross financing requirements in To offset these pressures, the government has identified revenue and expenditure measures, and plans on a modest amount of net domestic financing. The Minister of Finance and Economic Development is expected to present the fiscal adjustment package to Cabinet in early-June 2014. The revenue measures are worth about 2.8 percent of GDP and include selective increases in customs duties, targeted tax compliance operations, non-tax revenues (surplus resources generated by several extra-budgetary funds), as well as additional customs revenues from a determined effort to address identified leakages. Expenditure measures are worth 1.8 percent of GDP and include re-prioritizing non-personnel, non-interest current expenditure, while ring-fencing high-value social spending. As a result of these measures, the authorities now project total revenues to reach a conservative US$4,014 million (29.8 percent of GDP) in 2014, while total cash expenditures are projected at US$4,092 (30.4 percent of GDP). If fully implemented, these measures could result in a small budget deficit of US$78 million (around 0.6 percent of GDP) in 2014, on a cash basis. The main degree of freedom left relates to diamond dividends. Unlocking this revenue source will require full and prompt implementation of the measures announced in the 2014 budget. These measures include disallowing royalty as a deductible expense against taxable income, withholding a 2.5 percent depletion fee, withholding royalties on diamond sales (15 percent of gross sales), and withholding 15 percent of gross proceeds from diamond sales as interim (“special”) dividends for direct payment to the Treasury. All these measures were included in the 2014 Finance Act signed by the President in April. The implementation of the 15 percent special dividend Page 13 withholding has been suspended for now, pending further consultations with mining companies, which are resisting it on grounds that it would reduce their ability to invest in new production. The consultations are scheduled for June, and the authorities are keen to start collecting these dividends soon. As a result, the authorities still project diamond dividends of US$82 million in 2014 (versus the original US$96 million in the 2014 budget), but there are risks of further delays. Staff recommendations Staff sees the revised fiscal target for 2014 (a cash deficit of 0.6 percent of GDP) as broadly appropriate. It represents a significant fiscal adjustment relative to 2013 (which closed with a deficit of 2.2 percent of GDP). Staff welcomes recent steps to increase diamond revenue transparency and urges the authorities to speedily implement the announced measures to mobilize diamond dividends, including by defining a clear date to lift the current suspension on them. Staff encourages the authorities to also consider tax reforms in line with previous Fund TA recommendations (for example, by increasing excises on some alcoholic beverages and by changing the VAT status of some goods from zero-rated to exempt). Staff further encourages the authorities to identify additional potential revenue and financing sources which may need to be mobilized if risks to current revenue projections materialize. Rebalancing the expenditure mix and advancing public financial management (PFM) reforms remain critical for medium-term fiscal sustainability. With employment costs (including grant-aided institutions and pensions) accounting for 79 percent of projected total revenue and a similar fraction of proposed spending in 2014, the expenditure mix is clearly unsustainable. A large public sector wage bill and unclear remuneration policies going forward put at risk the government’s ability to achieve its objectives under ZIM ASSET. Staff urges the adoption of a medium-term fiscal strategy aimed at rebalancing expenditure away from employment costs in order to increase capital investment and spending on social programs. Going forward, staff supports the authorities’ commitment to hold nominal wage increases in line with inflation and to maintain the hiring freeze, except in critical areas and only if these vacancies cannot be filled through internal mobility. To minimize the risk of additional fiscal stress in 2014, it is also essential that the authorities refrain from further wage increases this year. If these recommendations are implemented, total employment costs (including pensions and grant-aided institutions) could decline under 20 percent of GDP by 2019. The authorities should also continue to protect high- value, high-impact social spending, and they should aim to gradually raise capital spending and net lending to around 4-5 percent of GDP in the medium term. Staff encourages targeting a gradual strengthening of the fiscal balances over the medium term. Targeting a medium-term primary cash balance between 1.5 and 2 percent of GDP will help the government rebuild fiscal and external buffers and generate debt servicing capacity, which will be needed to move ahead with debt restructuring. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plans to strengthen financial monitoring and oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and local authorities. Page 14 Tackling the stock of domestic payments arrears should remain a priority, but significant progress in 2014 is unlikely. Given the very tight resource constraints in 2014, the authorities plan to prioritize the clearance of pre-2013 domestic arrears (some $23 million) by year- end. On the other hand, given the inadequate provisions for service providers in the 2014 budget (US$56 million versus projected bills of US$126 million), 2014 is likely to see a net accumulation of domestic arrears of about 0.8 percent of GDP. There is a risk that arrears will grow further if tax and nontax collections fall short of projections and the authorities are unable to take offsetting revenue and financing measures. The authorities are committed to eliminating the total stock of end-2014 domestic arrears by end-2016. Going forward, progress on this issue will require more realistic budgeting, combined with improved expenditure controls and measures to curb consumption. The authorities acknowledged that 2013 was a difficult year, agreed that their fiscal plans face significant short-term risks, and concurred that strengthening fiscal balances in the medium term is an important objective. They are determined to unlock diamond revenues and make the sector more transparent. They emphasized that they have considered advice from previous TA on tax policy and have implemented many of the recommendations. Making further progress in this area is conditioned on a stronger economic outlook. The authorities welcome further Fund TA on reforming the fiscal regime for extractive industries and on medium-term expenditure frameworks. Although agreeing that the wage bill represents a large fraction of overall spending, the authorities indicated that the new government had campaigned on the promise of higher pay for civil servants, which needed to be fulfilled this year. They have expressed their intention to reduce the weight of the public sector wage bill in total spending over time, noting that the speed with which they can achieve this objective will be affected in part by the growth rate of the economy. The authorities are prepared to implement further expenditure reprioritization measures, in case revenues underperform, relative to revised 2014 projections. Finally, they have expressed their determination to improve the oversight of SOEs and local authorities, which are a significant source of fiscal risk.