Despite efforts to enhance the legal and regulatory framework, financial sector vulnerabilities persist. The RBZ has intensified monitoring of troubled banks, with a particular focus on loan provisioning practices and risk management. Most of these banks are insolvent, but continue to intermediate. While the troubled banks are not systemically important, there is a risk of disorderly resolution of these banks, which could further affect already weak confidence in the system. The new framework for contingency planning and systemic crisis management, which was approved by the RBZ Board in October 2013, will provide a set of policies and processes necessary for prevention and management of banking crises. The framework is to be shared with the Multidisciplinary Financial Stability Committee. Furthermore, the planned amendments to the Banking Act, which are aimed at improving corporate governance and strengthening the Troubled and Insolvent Bank Resolution Framework, will help to enhance stability. Page 15 To address deteriorating asset quality and restore confidence, serious consideration should be given to closing troubled banks (if non-systemic), or at least ring-fencing them, for example, by restricting their ability to take new deposits from the public. With the help of outside consultants, the RBZ is developing a framework for NPL resolution. Any strategy to deal with this issue should avoid rewarding poor past lending decisions and should be accompanied by a strong focus on the risk that current economic conditions and poor lending practices could result in further growth in NPLs. In January 2014, the RBZ announced an immediate end to new insider and related-party loans: banks’ boards are required to review the levels of insider loans, ensure adequate provisioning, and report regularly to the RBZ. The RBZ’s decision to allow more time to meet the increase in the minimum capital requirements is justified, as the June 2014 deadline for reaching a minimum capital of US$100 million was looming with most banks being far below that level. In the period ahead, the RBZ will need to closely monitor observance of the interim milestones for progress towards the December 2020 minimum capital requirements. The AFTRADES interbank liquidity facility is a worthwhile policy experiment and offers potential for improving the operations of the interbank market without significant fiscal risks. Steps are being taken to recapitalize the RBZ, to allow it to resume some of its core functions. The authorities announced plans for the central government to assume all of RBZ’s non- core debt (some 10 percent of GDP, largely non-performing). In addition, they announced plans for the RBZ to resume its function as banker to the government, and to establish a fully-funded lender- of-last resort (LOLR) facility to accommodate solvent banks. As an initial step, in March and April 2014 the authorities issued $146 million in debt instruments to settle RBZ legacy debts related to old foreign currency accounts. The authorities believe that these measures will strengthen financial stability. Staff recommends that the timing of the implementation of these steps take into account fiscal pressures. In particular, the LOLR facility should be implemented only after the present period of high fiscal stress is over, and liquidity support should only be provided to solvent banks. Staff supports a cautious and gradual approach to the transfer of the treasury account from the Commercial Bank of Zimbabwe (CBZ) to the RBZ. The transfer carries implementation risk, as the RBZ has not performed this function for several years, is not able to provide an overdraft facility, and its information systems are still not fully linked to the Treasury systems. Thus, it should take place only after the RBZ balance sheet has been sufficiently strengthened and its IT systems have been linked to the government’s own public financial management information system. There should be a sufficiently long transition period during which clear arrangements are maintained with CBZ to back-stop and cover any cash-flow gaps. Furthermore, this change will require of MoFED and RBZ close coordination and stronger cash management. In designing and implementing the indigenization policy for the financial sector, priority must be given to financial sector stability. Staff urges the authorities to ensure that the application of the indigenization policy is consistent with existing financial sector laws and prudential regulations, in order not to endanger bank access to external sources of financing. Out of a total of US$175.3 million in insider loans at end-December 2013, US$117.4 million (67 percent) are NPLs. Page 16 The authorities concurred that financial sector vulnerabilities remain but emphasized that recently announced initiatives should enhance stability. The RBZ considers the financial sector to be generally stable, despite the challenging macroeconomic environment and institution- specific deficiencies. The RBZ plans to request Fund TA on its NPL resolution strategy. Work is under way to finalize the framework for a credit reference bureau which is expected to reduce asymmetric information and improve credit risk management. The authorities emphasized that the troubled banks are not systemic, but agreed that disorderly unwinding of any of these banks would further undermine confidence. The authorities indicated that the efficient resolution of troubled banks is hampered by the RBZ’s lack of direct administrative authority to take necessary actions. For both curatorships and liquidations, the RBZ must consult with MoFED, and banks have the right to appeal to the finance minister, all of which tend to cause delays. (The Fund is providing TA in these areas.) The authorities expect financial institutions facing challenges to raise capital, consolidate their operations, merge with healthier banks, or convert their banking licenses to become deposit-taking microfinance institutions. The authorities remain committed to restoring the role of the central bank in their efforts to enhance financial intermediation. They emphasized that the recapitalization of the RBZ is a precondition for the safe transfer of the treasury account to the RBZ. These steps in turn will enable the RBZ to support the reactivation of the interbank market, thereby enhancing stability and increasing confidence. On indigenization of the banking system, the authorities remain committed to implementing this policy in a flexible way that safeguards financial stability. RESOLVING EXTERNAL PAYMENTS ARREARS, RESTORING