The Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) ended at end-December 2015. The authorities have met their commitments under the program, despite economic and financial difficulties. The program focused on implementing a limited number, but key reforms. The SMP has been a useful anchor in a difficult macroeconomic and political environment. The authorities demonstrated strong commitment to the program, and made significant progress in advancing their macroeconomic and structural reforms. Zimbabwe’s performance under the SMP has laid the basis for the country to undertake more ambitious reforms, and it set the stage for advancing the reengagement process and to justify an eventual request for a Fund-financial arrangement. The authorities have garnered broad support for their reengagement strategy from creditors and development partners, in particular their strategy to clear arrears to the international financial institutions (IFIs). The authorities have indicated their interest in seeking financial support from the IFIs in the context of their ambitious medium-term transformation agenda. Restoring fiscal and external sustainability, bolstering financial stability, and addressing the debt overhang remain critical for achieving the country’s development objectives. Going forward, bold, comprehensive medium-term reforms and policies are needed to tackle the structural impediments and accelerate growth, transform the economy, and reduce poverty. The authorities have started to develop a medium-term economic transformation program, in line with their broader reform agenda presented at the Lima meetings on arrears clearance in October 2015. The financing needs to support the reforms are substantial and the authorities recognize that normalizing relationship with the international community is paramount to unlock Zimbabwe’s access to much-needed financing. Based on their step-by-step, pragmatic approach, the authorities see clearing the arrears to the IFIs and advancing their reform agenda as precursors for seeking financial support from the IFIs, and eventually traditional debt treatment under the umbrella of the Paris Club. Zimbabwe’s political situation appears broadly stable, but with rising rivalries within the ruling ZANU-PF party. Infighting has intensified, with suspensions and expulsions from the party and the cabinet along factional lines since December 2014. A new opposition party led by former vice president Joice Mujuru, with support from some of those expelled from the ZANU-PF party was launched in early-March 2016. Presidential and legislative elections are scheduled for 2018. Despite these developments, there is broad political support for reforms and the reengagement process, the importance of which the president stressed in outlining a 10-point plan for economic growth and job creation in August 2015. The African Development Bank, the IMF, and the World Bank Group —IDA and the IBRD. Page 10