The Zimbabwean economy is operating well below capacity and there is urgent need for ambitious reforms to transform the economy and unleash the country’s growth potential. The country’s output is increasingly constrained by infrastructural bottlenecks—electricity, water, transport; unavailability and high cost of long-term capital; high cost of doing business; low productivity; and an uncompetitive manufacturing sector. Staff emphasized that catching-up with its regional peers will require addressing the debt overhang, normalizing relationship with the international community, and much faster implementation of bold policies and reforms to tackle the country’s structural impediments and facilitate sustainable long-term growth. The implementation of the framework, procedures and guidelines for implementing the indigenization policy has been controversial. While the proposal to set a levy on no- compliance with indigenization rules has been rejected, significant uncertainty remains on how compliance with the law can be achieved in an economically sensible and transparent manner. Staff urged the authorities to address this issue including by setting clear criteria on how existing business are going to be treated and how a transfer of shares will be financed (Annex IV). The authorities concurred with staff recommendations. They noted that they have already broadly outlined an ambitious reform program to support their reengagement process. Planned reforms include: (a) infrastructure development, particularly in such key areas as energy, water, roads, and schools; (b) enhancing the investment climate and reducing the cost of doing business; (c) further strengthening the financial sector; (d) accelerating public enterprises reforms and improving public financial management, (e) revitalizing agriculture and agro-processing; (f) aligning the laws with the 2013 constitution; and (g) strengthening the rule of law and improving governance. Page 24 Good progress has been made in improving the business climate, led by the Office of the President and Cabinet, with support from development partners. Zimbabwe is now ranked 155, out of 189 countries, on the World Bank’s 2016 Doing Business Rankings. Various legislations are being amended to improve the ease of doing business. In collaboration with development partners, a number of areas have been identified for scaled-up implementation to address remaining bottlenecks to doing business. These include: starting a business, construction permits and registering property, getting credit and resolving insolvency, protecting minority investors and enforcing contracts, and paying taxes and trading across borders. As part of the same effort, the authorities are setting up a one-stop shop for private investment. Critical action has been taken on land issues (Letter of Intent, ¶vi). In collaboration with key stakeholders, in early-March 2016, the authorities have prepared and submitted to the cabinet documents to establish the 99-year land leases. Once finalized, this is expected to pave the way for the leases to be used as collateral, improving security of tenure, which should provide positive signals to investors, and boosting agricultural production. Parliament is currently considering a bill for the establishment of the Land Commission (as provided by the Constitution) aimed at supporting land administration including through regular land audits. The authorities have also announced a framework for land compensation, which includes the following main elements: a) a recently- established Land Compensation Fund; b) an ongoing mapping of land boundaries; and c) an ongoing systematic evaluation of mapped land and improvements therein. The European Union and the United Nations Development Program are assisting the authorities in the mapping and evaluation exercise and mapping devising modalities for compensation. The authorities acknowledged that tackling Zimbabwe’s infrastructure deficit will be crucial for boosting productivity and competitiveness. The 2016 budget has allocated $315 million (2.1 percent of GDP) for infrastructure development, including in energy, transport and communication, water and sanitation (dam construction, rehabilitation and upgrading), roads, information technology. Zimbabwe currently produces less than half of its peak hour electricity demand. There are a number of projects, including hydro, coal-fired, diesel and solar power, at various stages of development aimed at addressing the country’s energy deficit.