The RBZ has made significant progress in restoring confidence and strengthening the financial sector. Banking sector conditions have improved (Figure 1, Table 6): all troubled banks have been removed from the sector and all operational banks maintain capital buffers above the minimum requirements—with two banks having exceeded the 2020 requirements. Asset quality has improved as the level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) continued to decline, reflecting bank closures, acquisition of collateralized NPLs by the Zimbabwe Asset Management Company (ZAMCO), and initiatives by the banks, and banks’ profitability is improving. ZAMCO is fully operational and self-sufficient (Box 2). The Afreximbank-supported $200 million interbank facility (AFTRADES) is helping to address liquidity challenges (Box 3). The RBZ has been recapitalized and the cleanup of its balance sheet is well advanced. Outside the 10 priority SOE, a forensic audit has been completed for ZimPost, and two forensic audits are ongoing for NetOne and Allied Timbers. The Act provides a comprehensive framework for debt management, comprising the purpose and objectives of borrowing, the mandate to issue debt and guarantees, and clear requirements for developing a debt management strategy and transparent reporting. In 2014, the RBZ issued directives for Tier 1 banks (undertaking core banking activities plus additional services) to have minimum core capital requirements of US$100 million by 2020. The People’s Own Savings Bank does not have a minimum capital requirement. At end-December 2015, the level of NPLs, excluding the one bank under provisional judicial management, stood at 10 percent. These include loan restructuring, refining of underwriting standards, and establishment of loan recovery units. By end-January 2016, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development had taken over $656 million (4.6 percent of GDP) of RBZ’s noncore liabilities. Page 19 Box 2. ZAMCO: Helping to Address the High Levels of Nonperforming Loans As part of its multi-pronged approach to tackle the high level of nonperforming loans (NPLs), in early-2014, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ), with Fund assistance, established the Zimbabwe Asset Management Corporation (Private) Limited (ZAMCO). The high levels of NPLs mainly reflected past unsound lending practices—including cases of insider and related party loan exposures, weak corporate governance, poor risk management, asset-liabilities mismatch and an underperforming economy. The level of NPLs increased steadily, particularly since early-2012, and peaked at 21 percent in September 2014. ZAMCO was tasked with acquiring, restructuring, and disposing of NPLs. ZAMCO commenced the first phase of NPLs acquisition in October 2014, focusing on the top 100 NPLs, in terms of absolute size, across the financial sector (out of a total NPL portfolio of $816 million— 21 percent at end-September 2014), and on those NPLs where the underlying companies have prospects of viability if the loans are restructured. The restructuring involved extending the loan repayment period, reducing interest rates, capital repayment holiday and in some instances, conversion of the debt into equity. As at end-December 2015, ZAMCO has purchased eligible mortgaged-backed NPLs amounting to $360 million, financed by long-term government debt securities. Debt servicing obligations are met through a stream of income placed in a sinking fund. ZAMCO is fully functional, guided by an operational framework, (including an asset valuation and transfer pricing strategy), and a governance structure that is in line with international best practices. ZAMCO’s operating costs were initially met by the RBZ. However, since October 2015, ZAMCO has been self-sufficient, generating its own funding through arrangement fees, interest from restructured loans, and dividends from preference shares. As at end-December 2015, ZAMCO had sufficient resources to cover its operating expenses for the next two years, at current levels of operation. The work of ZAMCO has helped to restore financial sector viability by strengthening banks’ balance sheets and providing them with much-needed liquidity. The level of NPLs, while still high, has been reduced significantly from the peak of 21 percent in September 2014 to 10 percent (excluding the one bank under provisional judicial management) at end-December 2015. In addition, the restructuring efforts have brought relief to a number of corporates who faced very high financing costs. The regulatory framework is being strengthened. The approved amendments to the Reserve Bank and Banking Acts are awaiting presidential assent. The amendments seek to align banking laws with recent developments, including a more comprehensive framework on risk management and corporate governance, introduce greater transparency in shareholdings and operations of banking institutions and controlling companies, and provide for the setup of the credit reference bureau. The new legislation will go a long way to further strengthen the regulatory framework, and safeguard the sector. Pension and insurance legislation is being amended to strengthen the industry’s regulatory framework, and bring the legislation in line with international standards. However, challenges remain and staff emphasized the need for continued strong, proactive supervision. Liquidity conditions remain tight against the background of inadequate capital flows, low commodity prices, the economic slowdown, and negative inflation. Credit risks will remain high in this challenging economic environment. Moreover, deflation risks can further strain corporate sector’s capacity to repay. Further reduction in NPLs and increased access to credit remain important to cement financial stability and reinforce confidence. Early passage of the Banking Page 20 Amendment Bill, which will effect the amendments to the Reserve Bank and the Banking Acts, would enhance financial stability. Box 3. Zimbabwe: The Afreximbank Trade Debt-Backed Security Facility To help address short-term liquidity challenges, in the context of market segmentation, the Afreximbank-supported interbank liquidity facility was launched in March 2015. The $200 million facility, which is underwritten by Afreximbank under the Afreximbank Trade Debt Backed Securities (AFTRADES), has helped to redistribute funds from some banks with high levels of liquidity (surplus banks) to those facing liquidity shortages (deficit banks). The interbank facility is managed by the RBZ, acting as agent for the Afreximbank. The facility enables deficit banks to access the funds provided by the surplus banks, through the RBZ, at interest rate of 8 percent, for which they provide acceptable collateral for borrowing, including loans and advances. Surplus banks earn 5 percent interest rates on their funds which are secured by the AFTRADES. At end-January 2016, the pool of AFTRADES secured funds was $176 million, reflecting participation of six surplus banks, and $154 million disbursed to deficit banks. The levels of financial inclusion in Zimbabwe improved markedly from 60 percent in 2011 to 77 percent in 2014, mainly due to increased mobile banking services (Text figure and text table 1). Among the rural adult population, the level of inclusion rose to 62 percent in 2014, from 27 percent in 2011. According to the FinScope Survey, some 81 percent of banked adult Zimbabweans was using financial products and services through both the formal and informal sectors in 2014. This placed Zimbabwe among the highest levels of financial inclusion in SSA. Access to finance is mainly through the banking institutions. Microfinance institutions (MFIs) play an important role in channeling credits to the SMEs and low-income rural population. Based on the 2011 and 2014 Finscope Consumer Surveys. As of end-2015, the financial sector consisted of 13 commercial banks (82 percent of financial sector assets), 4 building society, 1 savings bank, 153 credit-only MFIs, 2 deposit-taking MFIs, and 2 development finance institutions. Indicator 20112014 Formally served3869Banked2430Other formal (nonbank)2667Informal4137 Excluded4023Reliance exclusively on bank products81Reliance exclusively on nonbank products623Reliance exclusively on informal financial products or services227.8Number of banked adults (million) 1.52.2Number of cellphone banking adults40,000560,000Number of persons registered for mobile banking (million)03.2 Source: Finscope Survey 2014 Zimbabwe: Key Financial Inclusion Inidcators 2011 and 2014 (in percent, unless otherwise stated) Page 21 The RBZ, in collaboration with key stakeholders, has developed a national financial inclusion strategy The overarching goals for 2020 are to (a) broaden access to financial products and services (from 69 to 90 percent); and (b) increase the proportion of banked adults (from 30 to 60 percent). Despite the increase in the portion of the population accessing formal financial services, there are still gaps particularly in the level of access to, usage, and quality of financial products and services. The gaps are more pronounced among the rural population, women and youths, small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and the small-scale agricultural sector. The main barriers to financial inclusion have been high levels of poverty, low disposable income, unavailability of affordable and appropriate products and services, cost of services, low levels of financial literacy, information asymmetry, and lack of confidence. Banks have developed three-year strategies anchored on increasing branch network, adopting technology innovations to make greater use of agent and mobile banking, provision of no-fees/low cost and microfinance products. The RBZ, with support from the World Bank and key stakeholders, is developing consumer protection standard and guidelines, and a financial education strategy. In addition, as a complement to the credit reference system, a collateral registry is being established to enhance the range of acceptable and qualifying collateral security by enabling SMEs, low income groups to register their moveable assets to obtain credit. Financial deepening and inclusion is expected to encourage savings mobilization and stimulate investments, thereby contributing to sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. The authorities concurred that supervision should be strengthened and risks carefully monitored. They are cognizant that the international and domestic economic environments pose The Zimbabwe National Financial Inclusion Strategy, 2016–2020 was launched in early-March 2016. Based on the 2014 Finscope Consumer Survey, access to financial services increased from 38 percent in 2011 to 69 percent in 2014, while South Africa was at 75 percent, Botswana 59 percent, Zambia 21 percent, and Tanzania 57 percent. Some 70 percent of the population lives in rural areas. The World Bank Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Survey Diagnostics Report 2014 revealed low financial literacy in Zimbabwe. Financial Inclusion in Zimbabwe Formal Informal ExcludedSource: FinScope 2014 0%20%40%60%80%100%Mauritius 2014 South Africa 2014Namibia 2011Swaziland 2014Bostwana 2009 Lesotho 2011 Zimbabwe 2014Malawi 2014 Zambia 2009 Tanzania 2013Mozambique 2009 Financial Inclusion in Zimbabwe compared to other SSA Countries Formal Informal Exluded Source: FinScope 2014 Page 22 risks for banks. The RBZ has requested technical assistance and training is various aspects of banking supervision and stress testing. The authorities noted that while increased financial inclusion create opportunities for broader economic growth, it also poses supervisory and regulatory challenges which the RBZ is planning to address in its operations and financial regulations. In this regard, the authorities plan to, inter alia : a) facilitate capacity building programs in financial institutions; b) develop a comprehensive and harmonized legal and regulatory framework for financial consumer protection; c) issue guidance to banking institutions and payment system providers on acceptable conduct and practices; and d) develop legal and regulatory framework for the savings and credit cooperative societies. In addition, they plan to strengthen the framework for cooperation and collaboration among the various supervisory and regulatory institutions, to enhance risk management.