Discussions on the first and second reviews are at an advanced stage. Program performance has been mixed, and the SMP period, originally scheduled to expire at end-2013, was extended by Fund Management through end-June 2014 to allow time to strengthen policies. Of the six quantitative targets for the first review, three were met and three were missed for the end-June 2013 test date (Table 9), although most deviations were moderate. The floor on the primary fiscal balance was missed by 1.3 percent of GDP. The continuous zero ceiling on new domestic arrears was As of end-December 2012, minimum capital requirements are US$25 million for commercial and merchant banks, and US$20 million for building societies. There is no minimum capital requirement for People’s Own Saving Bank (POSB). The currencies of China, India, Japan, and Australia were added as legal tender in February 2014. Fund Management granted the extension in December 2013, prior to the expiration of the SMP period, and the Board was informed via EBS/14/1. Page 9 missed, in part because the authorities prioritized the clearance of old verified arrears over payment of unverified new bills. Reflecting fiscal constraints, the floor on usable international reserves was missed by a small margin, as reserves stayed unchanged rather than show the small increase targeted. Non-concessional external debt met the continuous ceiling at end-June, but exceeded it by a relatively small amount at end-November 2013, following the signing of a US$319 million non- concessional loan with China Eximbank to finance an essential infrastructure project (the overhaul of the Kariba hydroelectric plant). For the end-December 2013 test date, the authorities met three of the six revised quantitative targets. They met the floors on the stock of usable international reserves and on PRGT payments, and the continuous ceiling on the stock of new non-concessional external debt. They missed the target for the primary fiscal balance on a cash basis by about 1.6 percent of GDP, due to significant weakness in tax revenues in the last quarter of 2013 (Figure 4). Given the very tight fiscal space in Q4 of 2013, the authorities missed the floor on protected social spending by about 0.3 percent of GDP and the stock of domestic arrears overshot its ceiling by a similar margin. The electoral process and the post-election transition delayed the implementation of structural reforms. Eventually, three of the five structural benchmarks for the first review were met, as was one of the five structural benchmarks for the second review (Table 10): The new Income Tax Bill was submitted to Parliament in May 2013 and passed in June 2013; the new framework for contingency planning and systemic risk management was submitted to the RBZ Board and approved in October 2013; the time-bound action plan by the Public Service Commission on measures to modernize human resource management and payroll systems was submitted to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) in mid-December 2013; and the RBZ Debt Assumption Bill (formerly the RBZ Debt Relief Bill) was approved by Cabinet in November 2013 and submitted to Parliament in April 2014. The report on the stock of verified pre-2013 domestic arrears was finalized in mid- December 2013. While the report itself was not published on MoFED’s website, the total stock of domestic arrears and the strategy to clear it were both made public in the 2014 National Budget Statement submitted to Parliament in December 2013. Regarding a new Mines and Minerals Act, the new government decided to accomplish its objectives through amendments to the Act. After extensive consultations with stakeholders, the amendments will be submitted to Cabinet in June 2014. The authorities also decided to prioritize these amendments over amendments to the Precious Stones Trade Act, which are now expected to be completed in the second half of 2014. The Public Service Commission was renamed the Civil Service Commission under the new Constitution. Page 10 The new government is reviewing the amendments to the Banking Act, for which a draft was at an advanced state. The principles for the amendments will be submitted to Cabinet in June 2014 and to Parliament in July 2014. The statutory instrument establishing a formula for diamond dividends was not issued due to the lack of enabling legislation, but broadly equivalent measures have been introduced in 2014 to increase diamond revenues and boost transparency in the industry. First, the 2014 Finance Act, signed into law in April 2014, introduced the withholding of a special dividend equal to 15 percent of the gross proceeds from diamond sales. Second, the authorities constituted a joint task force composed of technical staff from MoFED, the Ministry of Mines and Mining Development (MoMMD), and the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority to forecast and monitor diamond-related revenue flows. Third, the authorities submitted to Parliament the 2012 audited financial accounts of the Zimbabwe Mining Development Corporation (ZMDC) and published them online in May 2014. Finally, following the lifting of EU sanctions against the ZMDC, the Minerals Marketing Corporation of Zimbabwe successfully conducted two diamond auctions in Antwerp (in December 2013 and February 2014) and one in Dubai (March 2014). Going forward, the authorities intend to ensure that all diamonds are sold through auctions at international trading centers. More fundamentally, the authorities are analyzing the structure of the diamond sector to streamline the number of companies in it. They also intend to undertake a thorough reassessment of the fiscal regime for mining, including diamond mining.